Lisa Tagliaferri
Lyrical Mysticism: The Writing and Reception of Catherine of Siena
Chapter V


The English Reception of Catherine of Siena’s Texts and Spirituality


Coming from the vernacular tradition, with texts grounded in popular discourse, but outside of the language of the religious, the elite, and the powerful, it was a concern of Catherine’s followers to quickly render her works into Latin. Catherine’s Dialogo was translated into three Latin versions by three of her followers: Cristofano di Gano Guidini,[1] Stefano Maconi,[2] and her confessor Raymond of Capua.[3] Her letters survive in Latin translations in several manuscripts,[4] and her life would also be treated in Latin texts as Raymond’s Legenda maior, and Caffarini’s two works — the abridged Legenda minor and the more robust Libellus de Supplemento. The significance of rendering Catherine’s texts into Latin proved to be pivotal for Catherine’s eventual canonization, but this translation work was equally important to enable the dispersion of her texts into other European vernaculars. In many ways, these two pathways may have aided each other, as increased awareness about Catherine throughout Europe potentially served her in a religious context, and a religious interest in her may have driven the adoption of her texts in religious houses and homes of the pious laity outside of Italy.
It is Cristofano’s translation of Catherine’s Dialogo into Latin that became the source for the early 15th-century Middle English translation of Catherine’s book, which eventually became known as the Orchard of Syon (Schultze 189). Later printed by Wynkyn de Worde in 1519, the manuscript versions of the Orchard of Syon are the earliest English texts we have of Catherine’s writing. The translation of Raymond’s Legenda into the Lyf of Katherine of Senis is only extant in printed form, with productions run in 1492 and 1500. The English version of Catherine’s Dialogo seems to have been specifically done for the nuns of the Syon Abbey, while the translation of Raymond’s Legenda was read by Dominican nuns at Swine Priory in Yorkshire and Cistercian nuns at Dartford Priory, and a copy was also found in the monks’ library at Syon (Grisé, “Catherine of Siena[a],” 217). Though these texts had their origins in religious houses, they also would circulate into lay communities, particularly the pious lay and those who had connections in the religious houses. 
In the production of the English text of Catherine’s writing, there are several important linguistic and gendered implications to consider. For one, Latin is used as an intermediary language, with Latin translation being completed exclusively by men. The Latin texts of the Dialogo were done for their own purpose: serving as official documents for the Church that translated Catherine’s text not only into a different language but also to be within the purview of masculine discourse. The translation of Catherine’s words certainly benefitted her in the process towards canonization — other Italian religious women, such as Elena da Udine, would not reach sainthood with only vernacular texts. As Alison Knowles Frazier writes (233): 
Vernacular accounts were especially aimed at women … But the cases of Birgitta of Sweden, Catherine of Siena, and Francesca Bussi indicate that a vernacular account would not have been sent to Rome, at least not unaccompanied by a Latin narrative … Fifteenth-century practice demanded a Latin account. 
While these Latin texts aided Catherine, they also helped her male followers who produced these works in their political aspirations and religious professions, as they were connected to someone on her way to sanctity. Though vernacular texts were intended for a female audience, the Latin translations and original Latin texts were designed with high-office male religious in mind, even if they would later become the vehicles through which subsequent vernacular translations were made possible.
Unlike the intended professional male readership of the Latin texts, the English texts — though written by men and following the masculine transmission of a text written by a woman — was written with female readership in mind. As the mystical figure — and particularly the female mystical figure — is often viewed as a conduit that serves God’s words to Christians, it is worth examining how men have served as the conduits for Catherine’s words, especially as they migrate into English.[5] The general perception of women serving as conduits of the divine is that it is the divine speaking through a female vessel. On the other hand, when men engage with women’s words, the presumption is that it’s men who are shaping the words of women in some way. As has been stated above, it seems unlikely that at least in terms of the Italian tradition, the men around Catherine were seeking to change her message. Though some, like Caffarini, had their own political motives to canonize Catherine, the tenor of themes of the texts are consistent throughout the Dialogo, letters, and prayers. That being said, there is a shift in Raymond’s construction of Catherine in the Legenda that he authors and her own self-construction within her texts, in that he tends towards casting her within a more traditional role of feminine spirituality that de-emphasized her voice and actions. 
Expressions of spirituality, especially feminine spirituality, greatly differed between Italy and England during the late Middle Ages and early Renaissance period, causing the translation of the text to be not only a linguistic endeavor, but also a theoretical and theological one. The adoption, therefore, of the Lyf of Katherine of Senis into a Middle English spiritual context seems more in keeping with the motives of both the text and the approach to cloistered and meditative feminine spirituality that was idealized in England. The translation of the Dialogo seems more unusual as it depicts a much more publicly engaged spirituality that pivots on acts of charity in the world. Though the editorial work and framing within the Orchard of Syon render it a different text than the Dialogo, Catherine’s words remain generally intact within a quite literal translation. This provided Catherinian spirituality with a platform within English culture, even if it was tempered in some way. In offering her own words to female readers, though mitigated through translation and editorial choices, the text constructs Catherine as a spiritual teacher — if not a precise model — for Catholic English female devotion. 
Though not titled as such in the manuscripts, the English rendition of Catherine’s Dialogo eventually became known as the Orchard of Syon, and may have been made available as early as 1420. This was also the year that first professions were made at Syon Abbey, five years after the placement of the foundation stone laid by Henry V on February 22, 1415 (Hodgson vii). The desire for a Bridgettine order in England likely began with the marriage between the daughter of King Henry IV, Phillipa, and the King of Sweden, Eric XIII of Pomerania. During her time in Sweden, Phillipa’s head lady-in-waiting was the noblewoman Lady Katarina Knutsdotter who was also granddaughter of Bridget of Sweden, and Phillipa served as a benefactor of and frequent guest to Vadstena Abbey, founded by Bridget in 1346 (Flemberg 181-92). The Syon Abbey was a project that was a component of Henry V’s effort to legitimize his dynasty, and proved to become the most important house for female religious established in England in the century prior to the Reformation. Remarkably, the abbey would survive into the twenty-first century, with the last nuns leaving as recently as 2011. 
Being the only house in England of the Bridgettines or the Order of St Saviour, which was founded by Bridget of Sweden, it was suggestive of the contemporaneous ongoing movement that spoke to renewal and reform in spirituality. It enjoyed great funding by Henry V, took a stand against Henry VIII’s project of the Reformation, and helped to develop Catholic recusant identity (Bainbridge 82). The role of Bridget of Sweden to the community should not be overlooked, as she was not a conventional saint, especially for contemporary English devotion at the time, which was concerned with Lollardy. Notably serving as a model for the English religious figure Margery Kempe, the noble-born Bridget was not a virgin but instead was a married woman who bore eight children and was widowed following a pilgrimage she took with her husband to Santiago de Compostela. Upon the death of her husband, Bridget joined the Third Order of St. Francis and devoted herself to a life of prayer, caring for the poor and the sick, and developing her community of double monasteries where men and women could live in poverty but still have access to books. Syon itself was originally a doubly monastery, possessing a separate community with a library each for men and women. We have inherited a large and thorough library catalogue from Syon Abbey that was preserved throughout the community’s exile in Lisbon during the post-Reformation. The collection is now housed at the University of Exeter.
In addition to Bridget’s interest in texts and literacy, community-building, and her status as a tertiary nun, she shared political aspirations with Catherine of Siena, traveling to Rome and working to return the papal seat there from Avignon. Along with being a biological mother, Bridget’s spirituality clashed with English religiosity due to her status as a mystic and a non-martyr, important because martyrdom served as the chief criterion for English sanctity from the early Middle Ages through the Reformation (Despres, “Ecstatic Reading and Missionary Mysticism[b],” 144). English devotional practices, especially for women, were very restricted and continental figures that managed to develop a career of public spiritual advocacy and mystical practices would not prove to be suitable models. Though Margery Kempe suffered for her public displays of piety, Julian of Norwich’s position as an anchoress allowed her freedom to express her mystical experiences in texts. While 15th-century England does not immediately seem like a fitting environment for a figure like Catherine, not yet canonized, the local situation in the Brigittine Syon Abbey offered a more apt context for women to read an English translation of the Dialogo. 
  

Woodcut from Wynkyn de Worde’s printing of the Orchard of Syon, 1519.
Image courtesy Wellcome Images.
        As a text alone, the Orchard of Syon does not provide much available information and data regarding its provenance or the purpose behind it. Inevitably linked with the Syon Abbey and its nuns, it was likely intended for the first generation of these nuns specifically, and its primary translator was an anonymous one. As C. Annette Grisé notes, Wynkyn de Worde’s printing of the Orcharde of Syon was “the first book to showcase its association with Syon and its nuns,” with the nuns being addressed directly in the second prologue and epilogue, in addition to woodcuts that are evocative of the female community there (“Syon Abbey and English Books,” 132). From there, many more books of the “Syon tradition” would establish references to the abbey among its framing materials, including the works of Richard Whitford in the 1520s and 1530s. The manuscript of this English translation of Catherine’s text was found within two copies according to an “Envoy,” and the writing of it was continued by another by the name of “Dan Jamys.” This second man may have been a monk in the Carthusian monastery of Sheen, across the Thames from the female Syon Abbey (Schultze 189). Though in many ways the text is a faithful one, the major changes are editorial in nature, which serve to recast Catherine’s unique spirituality to one that is more in-line with traditional English expressions of devotion. C. Annette Grisé maintains that “framing materials” — prologues, prefatory letters, woodcuts, incipits, explicits and title-pages — were deployed to establish what amounted to a spiritual provenance within Syon Abbey, leading to substantiating a form of legitimacy on the part of the community (136). 
Whether or not the prologue added this notion of a source, it is clear that the frame added to the Orchard served to allegorize the original Italian material, thus rendering Catherine’s concept of the vineyard and communal vineyards instead into a monastic image of a cloistered garden, and placing a greater emphasis on the “ghostly orchard” and “ghostly learning” rather than an active spirituality based on doing good works in the world. In addition to the framing narrative, another editorial intervention occurs that restructures the rubric, moving away from the Italian formulation. In particular, the English version moves the treatise on tears from its own position within the colloquies, to being appended to the fourth chapter on “Prayer.” Despres contends that this movement decreases the significance of tears in Catherine’s devotion and as a holy behavior independent of prayer, situating tears as a private form of worship and a component of praying in general terms (154). Though these interventions may be seemingly slight moves, and in many ways the women of Syon Abbey were still provided with access to the texts that Catherine originally wrote, rendered for them to read in their own vernacular language, the same textual control and attention to Catherine’s unique spirituality that were components of her reception in the Italian tradition are not preserved in England. 
        Though the editorial changes done by the English translators of Catherine’s dialogue suggest a closed-off and more private and contemplative approach to spirituality, the significance of a literate female community engaging with Catherine’s texts should not be overlooked. The provenance of a Brigittine monastery certainly points to an interest in literacy, reading and books, and the Syon Abbey exemplifies this tradition with its great output and preservation of texts through the years, even maintaining them while the inhabitants were exiled in Lisbon during the years of the Reformation. Reading practices within the monastery were not limited to private devotion, and were structured throughout the day in various ways, with reading done silently and out loud with the utilization of printed books and manuscripts, and done both within communal spaces and privately in cells (Bowden 187). Of course, the women who would become the nuns and abbesses of Syon Abbey were from an elite class as they were able to read, unlike Margery Kempe who could not read and edit the autobiography she dictated to her scribes. 
As one may expect from a literary community, these women circulated the books of Syon Abbey with a complex network of female lay patrons. In part due to a Carthusian influence of the 15th century, the laity were able to imitate continental ecstatic women in some ways, and were also able to intersect with the texts coming out of religious houses due to their having family members placed there. Denise L. Despres names Cecily, Duchess of York and mother of Edward IV; Alianore Roos; and Elizabeth Sywardby as among the female lay patrons who were most interested in reading continental devotional works. Though this should not necessarily suggest an extremely wide readership of Catherine’s work in English, the lay patrons who were interested in the textual production at Syon Abbey were likely the reason behind Wynkyn de Worde’s 1519 printed edition of the Orchard. Indeed, Elizabeth Strickland, a nun at Syon Abbey, gave her printed copy to the wife of Richard Ashton of Middleton, her executor (Grisé, “Catherine of Siena,” 219). As Jennifer N. Brown notes in her essay “From the Charterhouse to the Printing House,” Wynkyn de Worde had access to one or more manuscript versions of this text that do not survive, as he includes a prologue not found in the three extant copies (33). Although it is unclear how many manuscript editions of the English translation of Catherine’s Dialogo existed, there were at least four copies, with the three described below still available to us.
The two earliest extant manuscripts of Catherine’s Dialogo into English date from the first half of the 15th century: British Library MS Harley 3432, and Cambridge, St John’s College MS C.25. These first two editions are from the early history of Syon Abbey (Grisé, Syon Abbey in Late Medieval England, 50). The third extant manuscript is from the second half of the 15th century, Morgan M 162. There are additionally two manuscripts that contain a portion of the translation: an extract of part I, chapter 12 in Manchester, John Rylands Library, MS Latin 395; and an extract of part V, chapter 2 in Oxford, University College, MS 14 (Schultze 190). 
        Though these manuscripts are named for the Abbey, and though there is evidence that this text was read by the women there, and though Catherine of Siena was an important female figure worshiped alongside the Virgin and Bridget of Sweden, “there is a conspicuous absence of evidence of manuscript production in the great women’s religious houses in England,” at Syon or any other convent (such as Barking, Dartford, Shaftsbury, Denny) (Despres, “Ecstatic Reading and Missionary Mysticism,” 147). Ian Doyle writes that while many cloistered women did not enjoy literacy, women belonging to prestigious religious houses owned “a good many books, both for prayer and for reading, in French and English, besides for worship in Latin, and there is no reason why some anonymous manuscripts from the better-educated houses … should not have been written, decorated and bound by them” (15). Therefore, though there is a clear connection between the Syon Abbey and its readership and ownership of the Orcherd of Syon, there is no concrete documentation that links the production of any of these manuscripts to the women or the Abbey outright.
        The earliest extant manuscript, the British Library’s Harley 3432 includes an incipit by an anonymous cleric who was most likely Carthusian, addressed to the “Religyuos moder & deuoute sustren, clepid & chosen bisily to laboure at the hous of Syon,” positioning this book within the context of the Abbey in an immediate way. This manuscript is exquisitely decorated, particularly at its celtic-knot initials with red, blue, green and white ink, and gold leaf, though some initials are left unfinished. For each new part, there is an emphasis on the border around the two columns of text, setting the structural parts off as discrete units. There is every indication that more decoration was intended for this manuscript as there are light marks in the rulings of many pages; good examples of this can be seen on pages 77r, 103v, 104r, 137r, 139r, and 174v. Most of the marginalia present seems to have been done by the original hand, in the form of citations or lengthy additions that replace cross-outs of the text in columns (as on 117r). Some marginalia includes decoration, including a drawing of a male face in profile between the columns on 122v — there is a reference to “poor men” in the proximate text.
There is also the marginalia of others in the book, including historically much more recent lightly done marginalia on 105r. At the beginning and last pages of the book there are many male autographs from the 16th and 17th centuries, showing clearly that this book continued to be seen as a luxury item, if not a text to read, throughout its life before its inclusion in the British Library. The material nature of the book reveals that there has been continued care, as some pages that were ripped were repaired with new vellum paper (not animal hide), as can be seen on pages 45, 50, 107 (small tear), 119, small repairs on 127 and 128, and on page 148. Some pages are ripped and repaired with new vellum (not animal hide), which can be seen on pages 21, 45, 50, slightly on 107, 119, small repairs on 127 & 128, 148. In the instance of page 21, it is possible to see that someone re-wrote the missing letters on the new vellum, which appears to have been added on the recto but transparent enough to see through to the verso. Though this repair was done with care it is an obvious remedy due to the use of much later paper. Despite this commitment to tending to the book, there is what appears to be a spill over some pages, particularly along the top, with pages 172-174 and 182-193 most damaged. These spills do not diminish the legibility, and instead suggest a continued engagement with the text beyond the book as a collectible. 
Among the signatures in the front and back of the book is one from Walter D’evereux, the 1st Devereux Earl of Essex. This became a book within John Batteley’s collection, who was a Church of England clergyman and antiquary. The Harley Collection purchased Batteley’s collection on November 5, 1723 (Wright 1966). Formed by Robert, Mortimer and Edward Harley, the Collection was bequeathed to Edward Harley’s widow Henrietta Cavendish, then to their daughter Margaret Cavendish Bentinck, and was eventually sold to the nation of England in 1753, forming one of the foundation collections of the British Library. The lifecycle of the manuscript points primarily to masculine readership or at least ownership through the 16th and 17th centuries, and eventually returns to female ownership before becoming part of a communal reading space more in line with its provenance. 
  

http://www.bl.uk/catalogues/illuminatedmanuscripts/ILLUMINBig.ASP?size=big&IllID=24730 


        The Cambridge, St John’s College MS C.25 is in a much different style to the Harley MS, with plainer decoration and with vellum much smaller in size. Initials have some decoration in red and blue ink and include gold leaf, though initials were cut out in two instances, and the first three pages of the manuscript are no longer extant. There is some sketched floral decoration in black ink in the margins, as well as banner illustrations to show continuing text to aid those who would sew the pages together. There is some marginalia that highlights text with lines and curves, including playful marginalia that turns the curves into a face on 54r. There is light textual marginalia written in Latin on several pages. The ink of this text is very faint, and it appears that it could be in the original scribal hand, though this cannot be certain and may instead point to another contemporary reader. In either case, this marginalia indicates that there is some educated readership engaging with this manuscript that itself has been the result of multilingual intertextuality.
        Morgan Library’s MS M.162 is dated to around 1470. It has 186 bound leaves, and is presented in one column rather than two. This book contains all the matter printed in Wynkyn de Worde’s Orcharde of Syon except for the first prologue. Among the owners of this text included John Crosse, Joseph Ames, Richard How of Aspley, Beds., along with the later owners William Morris and Richard Bennett. William Morris (1834-1896), best known for his textile designs and part of an artistic circle with Dante Gabriel Rossetti, was influenced in his art and writing by Italian Medieval and Renaissance literature. His book label reads: “FROM THE LIBRARY OF WILLIAM MORRIS KELMSCOTT HOUSE HAMMERSMITH” and is visible on the front inner page attached to the binding of the book. Known to be a voracious reader, he became an avid book-collector in his later years and amassed rare books dating back to a 13th century Bible (also in the Morgan Library, B2 264 A-B MS M.0109-11). Among his 15th-century books included Seneca, Ovid, Boccaccio, Aristotle, and Bernard of Clairvaux. The decoration in primarily in red and blue with flourishes. There is red decorating the letters at the beginning of sentences, and new chapters have a blue chapter symbol throughout. There are clever insertion marks, like the one that can be seen on 13v:
[add photo[c]]
This manuscript offers a later version of the text, perhaps one that would have originated near-contemporaneously with  the manuscript that Wynkyn de Worde would eventually use in his printed 1519 edition of the Orchard. 


Although this chapter is focused on the text of the Orchard of Syon, it is worth noting some of the other Catherinian texts that proliferated in England during the 15th-17th centuries. MS Bodley 131, dated to the 1430s, includes letters as well as short extracts of Catherine’s Dialogo and Bridget of Sweden’s Revelations[d] in sequence. The inclusion of the two side-by-side suggest a linking between their approaches to spiritual devotion that was not limited to Syon Abbey. The provenance of this book was York, in the north of England, and it belonged to John Morton of York who was a member of an Austin friars lay fraternity along with his wife (Grisé, “Catherine of Siena,” 219). Notably, the manuscript also includes a text of one of Catherine’s interlocutors: William Flete’s Remedies Against Temptations. 
As stated above, Raymond of Capua’s Lyf of Katherine of Senis was printed at two points (1492 and 1500), connoting its popularity. Differing from the Latin text, the English translator took liberties in shortening and editing the text so as to not go beyond the reader’s ability to understand. As Brown notes, the text was largely intended for the lay audience outside of the convent and charterhouse, which may explain why the text has been abbreviated (18). Within this English text, Catherine is put forth as an exemplary model of female devotion and sanctity, which is in keeping with Raymond’s construction of her as a less transgressive figure than she likely was during her time period. Interestingly, as Brown observes, the translator does not maintain the first person singular that Raymond used, but replaces the word “I” with the word “Raymond,” which was unusual for translations of vitae and other devotional texts of the same period (31). 
Another printing of interest is a book of devotional excerpts published in 1521 by Henry Pepwell for the laity, British Library Royal MS 17 D V. This has been of interest to scholars because it uniquely contains printed excerpts from The Book of Margery Kempe. Additionally, the text includes extracts from the Lyf of Catherine, as well as works by Richard of St Victor and Walter Hilton, and the Cloud of Unknowing and Hid Divinite. Brown’s analysis finds that the Catherine excerpts are truncated and included within this printing in order to appeal to a particular kind of reader who sought after an easily digestible female spirituality, with mystical elements removed (39). Eventually, the excerpts from Catherine’s Lyf would be stripped by later readers as they were perceived to display anti-Protestant sentiments. 
Finally, a 1609 translation of Catherine’s Life was sold by John Heigham to English recusants. Translated by John Fenn, a Roman Catholic priest who was living in exile in Leuven, this text seems unaware of the previous English translation, and interestingly was done from Ambrosianus Catherinus’s Italian version of Raymond of Capua’s Legenda maior. The intertextuality at play seems to recall Catherine to the vernacular tradition in which she was embedded, by further removing her figure from the Latin language. As this text originated in exile, it was also intended to support other recusants living in exile, though the bookseller Heigham wrote the dedicatory address to a specific unnamed female reader in particular. Again, the female readership is invoked if not outright intended by the men translating and editing this book for an English audience, though Brown notes that this dedication engages in a false construction wherein the printed, public text lays claim to a personal, private reader (40). The bookseller was later arrested and imprisoned in England for his Catholic book trade. As Brown convincingly argues, Catherine is of significance to the recusants in England as her having returned the papacy back to its rightful place in Rome resonated with their desire to return England to the Church of Rome (40). 


What is among the most intriguing qualities of the Middle English translation of Catherine’s Dialogo is the framing of the text. Following the “Translator’s Prologue,” the “Kalender,” and the “Prolog” is an introduction before the “Prima Pars.” It reads (18):
Here begynneÞ Þe boke of diuine doctrine, Þat is to seie, of Goddis techinge, ȝouen bi Þe persone of God Þe fader to Þe intellecte of Þe glorious virgyn, Seint Katerine of Seene, of Þe Ordre of Seint Dominike, whiche was write as sche endited[e] in her moder tunge, when sche was in contemplacioun inrapt of spirit, and sche heringe actueli and in Þe same tyme tellinge tofore meny what oure Lord God spake in her.
Along with Teresa of Avila, Catherine of Siena became a Doctor of the Church in 1970 (Teresa was honored first in September, and Catherine in October), by Pope Paul VI. The two of them are the first two female Doctors, and at the time of writing there are currently four. Having died in 1380, Catherine was canonized in 1461 by Pope Pius II. Naming her as Doctor of the Church is a testament to her balance of the contemplative and active life, as Church Doctors are known for their deep religious knowledge and their preaching. The translator of the Orchard of Syon discusses Catherine’s “intellecte” and how she was able to deliver “Goddis techinge,” though there is certainly a displacement of knowledge, as it is ultimately God’s knowledge that Catherine is able to convey through her intellect. Still, it is Catherine who is able to deliver this message through her intelligence or her knowing. From this, she was able to write the book in her native language, that would be transmitted into England even prior to her canonization.
        Framing the narrative in this way, by placing the book as divine doctrine, and framing Catherine as a writer who has the intellect of God, situates her as a figure in the position of someone who is about to share knowledge with the reader. The Middle English word “enditen” has several meanings, including “(a) To write or compose (a book, poem, letter, etc.)...; (b) to write...; (c) to compose (a song, a Psalm); (d) of oral composition or expression: to tell (a story), to sing or chant.”[6] The translator may by an off-chance be referring to the oral composition definition when discussing Catherine’s book, but it is more likely that he is providing Catherine with the agency of a writer outright, as three of the four definitions are concerned with actual writing. While the purpose of sharing knowledge may be true of many books, the translator underscores this message by placing it at the front of the text. Even though God may be the originator of this knowledge, it does not detract from Catherine’s position because she is the one who is able to appropriately relay this knowledge to the reader in a manner that they will be able to understand. Catherine, who was in ecstasy when she heard God’s voice, was afforded a special connection to God, and the reason for it seems to have been her intellect. The translator talks about the ghostly nature of what is to come, which is indicative of mysticism and contemplation rather than doing good social works in the world, emphasizing again Catherine’s intellectual capabilities rather than her acts of public charity. Though mysticism can sometimes be taken to be an emotional rather than an intellectual state, the translator here is rendering it as the result of thoughtful meditation and contemplation.
        As he will write later in the text, the translator favors an alternative form of intellectualism that is divorced from being well-read and studious. Catherine’s intellect is illuminated by the grace of God’s light, and this is in contrast to a “proud lettrid man” who learned from reading rather than by having a deep divine connection. The translator writes (187):
How Þei, Þe whiche ben come to Þe forseif staat of unyoun, ben illumyned and liȝtned in her iȝe of intellecte by grace with a liȝt aboue nature. And how it is betire to go for to haue counceil for Þe soulis heelpe to a meke man wiÞ an holy conscience, Þan to a proud lettrid man (187).
Catherine’s union with God afforded her an illuminated intellect that is light and is not proud. She is therefore more capable at giving council to help souls with getting into a state of holy conscience. Again, the idea of Catherine being a teacher is indicated by the idea of providing council for others. Moreover, her intellect is derived from a place that is above nature, so it is not something that can be read about in books written by humans for humans. Catherine, the mystic, straddles the spaces between humanity and the divine, and in so doing is able to convey her knowledge to others in a way that men with a knowledge of letters cannot do. Though one would suspect that the use of “man” here is in reference to a universal human and not the male sex, in the case of the “proud lettrid man” the translator is definitely referring to the male sex as women would not have had access to books in the same way as men at this time. If this is the case in the second instance, it is interesting to consider Catherine as a teacher for Christian men in a book that is intended for a female readership.
        Catherine’s knowledge is also referenced within the “Kalender” and is repeated in the text itself. The translator discusses Catherine’s knowing of so much of God’s goodness: “How Þis soule knowynge so myche of Þe goodnes of God preyede not oonly for cristen peple and for holy chirche, but preyede also for al Þe world” (3 and 56). Because of her deeper knowledge, Catherine is more empathetic, praying not only for those who are close to her and like her (that is, Christian people, and note the genderless word choice here), and praying not only for the Church, but praying also for the whole world. The knowledge that Catherine has access to allows her to consider a larger scope and commit to doing more for those people who are not like her and those institutions that are not her own. This, of course, is part of the general wisdom to love one’s neighbor as one loves oneself, but here the neighbor can be one that is quite unlike the self. 
        The “Prolog” itself also engages with the ideas of knowledge and learning, all centered around the allegory of the garden that is used throughout the frame of the translation. Along with this diction related to the intellect are words that pertain to the physical space of the garden, with its “manye walkynge paÞes,” which, though referencing a closed space in the case of the English nuns, is in keeping with the physical aspects of Catherine’s spirituality and her interest in walking and movement to serve God. Within the garden, the translator speaks to the fruit and the weeds that are contained therein (16):
But, sustren lyke it to ȝou to knowe Þat in gaderynge delitable fruyt I foond ful bittire wedis. Bittir & soure Þei ben to taaste, but profitable to knowe. Siche wedis I purpose to sette among good fruyt, not for feedynge, but to ȝoure knowinge. / TasteÞ hem and knoweÞ hem, Þat ȝe mowe beware of eny gostli enemy when Þei profre ȝou suche wedis. 
Alongside the delectable fruit in the garden, that is sweet to eat, are weeds that are bitter to taste but are worth knowing about. In suggesting that the women of Syon Abbey be aware of both good and bad, he is providing them with agency to be able to discern the difference and to not indulge with sin and the enemy. Here is the full transmission of knowledge, from Catherine’s original Italian text, to the Latin translations, to the Middle English translation, and finally to the women who will read it and are empowered to know the difference between fruit that is good and bad as a result of this chain of teaching. When considering this alongside the story of Genesis where it is Eve who takes a fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil only to plunge humanity into sin, there is markedly more credit afforded to the nuns of Syon, and any spiritual laywoman who may encounter this text, for they are able to encounter the weeds of bitterness but the knowledge serves to benefit them rather than render them sinful. While it is not certainly clear what having a female author as the provenance of this dissemination is, it seems that because Catherine is quite adept at encountering both good and evil and still choose the correct path, then other women are able to do the same in turn. Therefore, Catherine’s teaching is such that it believes in women to choose virtue, rather than assuming that they will commit sin as some form of a “weaker” sex more susceptible to coercion. 


        In her letters to women, Catherine recommends that they behave somewhere between a saintly dichotomy that is meek to one extreme and fervent to the other. The English translation of Catherine’s book is certainly closer to the meek end of the spectrum, but there is the opportunity for some interpretation, as the women of Syon Abbey are able to develop within their community, read and write, and teach and learn. This general tendency is in keeping with English female mysticism that the text of the Orchard of Syon inherited, which can be shown in the two most famous female mystics of the English Middle Ages: Julian of Norwich (c. 1342-1416) and Margery Kempe (c. 1373-1438). Though neither of these women would be canonized as Catherine was, they each represent one extreme of the saintly dichotomy that Catherine discusses, and neither of them truly approach the apt middle ground that Catherine advocates for, though there is some mediation within both of these women.
        Julian of Norwich was an anchoress of the Church of Saint Julian, the male saint after whom she named herself. Because of her position as a highly regarded religious woman who was behaving in a manner consistent with an extremely pious form of English female spirituality, she was sought after for advice and visited by many, including Margery Kempe who visited her around 1413 (Law[f] 184). At the age of 31, believed to be the year of 1374, she had 16 visions which she wrote down in the book known as Revelations of Divine Love, which she later expanded to a larger text in 1395. The only known extant manuscript of the short version exists today as British Library Additional MS 37790, dated to 1413. The shorter text is more personal and visceral, with the extended version becoming more generalized and more removed from Julian’s own individual experience with the visions. As, witin the text, she recounts her mother and friends by her sickbed, it is unlikely that she was an anchoress at the time of first writing the Revelations, but she would eventually withdraw to the church that belonged to the Benedictine nuns of Carrow. Despite her status as a recluse, she was still a prominent part of the community and was included in the wills of others in addition to being solicited for advice. 
        Educated, perhaps by Benedictine nuns, Julian was “relatively assured” yet offered a self-conscious meta-textual statement at the beginning of her short text, which would nevertheless not persist in the second longer-form version (McAvoy[g] 1). She writes (33):
But God forbid that you should take me for a teacher. Such is not my intention and never has been. I am a woman, ignorant, weak and frail, but I know what I am saying: I have been shown it by the sovereign teacher. In truth, charity moves me to tell it you, for I wish God to be known and my fellow Christians aided, as I would be myself, in the greater hating of sin and loving of God. / Ought I to believe, simply because I am a woman, that I should not tell you of God’s goodness? When I saw the vision I also saw that he wants it to be known -- as you shall clearly see in the matter that follows, if it be well and truly received. Soon you will forget me, a mere wretch; you will cease to notice me, and will behold Jesus who is teacher of all.
In negating herself as a teacher she is inevitably constructing herself as one, though she lies the primary onus of teaching on Jesus and not herself; she is an intermediary teacher. Indeed, it is the virtue of charity that moves her to share her knowledge with other Christians. Rhetorically she is able to temper her claims by offering herself as a meek woman and a “mere wretch” who will be forgotten despite the persisting of her text. Still, she is able to assert herself as being able to share her knowledge of God regardless of her gender in the claim, “Ought I to believe, simply because I am a woman, that I should not tell you of God’s goodness?” Just as Catherine is constructed as a teacher that relays what she learns from God to others, Julian self-constructs herself as a teacher through her mystical writing. Her writing is clear, rendered in the vernacular, and is intended to be accessible to others, further substantiating her assertion as a teacher.
        Julian rejects classic dualisms, that pivot good versus evil, the Virgin versus Eve, the earthly world versus the spiritual world, and men versus women. Julian does not offer any real contempt for the earthly world, constructing herself instead as a spiritual person who wanted to be closer to God to serve him. This does differ from Catherine’s approach which sees the earthly world and spiritual worlds intrinsically tied together. Though Julian does claim herself as an “ignorant, weak and frail” woman, she writes of God as mother, and the doctrine of the motherhood of God in the text following the 14th revelation. She explains that “God is truly our mother as he is our father,” making mention specifically of the second person of the trinity, as it is he who never stops being the son of God who is also our mother (Beer 77[h]). As discussed in Chapter 1, Christ’s nourishing body is often connected to femininity and motherhood as his blood and flesh feed Christians, much like a mother’s breastmilk feeds her children. 
        Julian of Norwich’s spirituality is quite consistent with the approach that is gestured towards in the Orchard of Syon which calls for a cloistered woman who is yet able to be embedded within a community in some way, and who is permitted to teach and learn. The meditative and contemplative approach that Julian takes is similar to Catherine’s initial reclusive impulse in which she remained in a room in her parents’ house to dedicate herself to God. However, Catherine would eventually leave her self-imposed cell to travel about the world and do good works for the public. Julian is able to be connected to her community through her writing and through providing advice to those who seek it out. Despite Julian’s traditional approach, she did not enjoy the same afterlife as Catherine, whose work traveled widely in the centuries after her death, and who would be canonized within the first hundred years of her death. 
        Margery Kempe offers the other extreme of spiritual approach, opting for traveling on pilgrimages, being loudly tearful in the streets, being in public without her husband, and wearing white despite her marital status. The Book of Margery Kempe, the writing of which began in 1436, is often considered to be the first autobiography in the English language. The only extant manuscript,British Library MS Additional 61823, dates from sometime before 1450 and was found in 1934 within the private library of the Butler-Bowdon family. The manuscript had previously belonged to a Carthusian monastery in Yorkshire, likely due to the Carthusians’ interest in mystical visions. A pamphlet of excerpts of The Book of Margery Kempe was printed by Wynkyn de Worde in 1501, and was later found alongside excerpts of Catherine’s texts as stated above, printed by Henry Pepwell in 1521. Because of the disparity of these editions, it is not entirely clear what the reception of her texts were during her lifetime, but we know that she was often reprimanded for her behavior within England, according to her own accounts.
In the “Proem,” Margery outlines the book’s purpose, which is to invoke (3)
sinful wretches wherein they may have great solace and comfort to them and understand the high and unspeakable mercy of our sovereign Saviour Christ Jesus… All the works of our Savior be for our example and instruction, and what grace that he works in any creature is our profit if lack of charity be not our hinderance.
Just like Julian of Norwich, and the translator of Catherine’s Dialogo, Margery introduces and frames her text with the notion that the book is intended to help others, and that it offers “example and instruction,” though particularly through Christ rather than through Margery herself. However, as it is a recounting of her life, it is suggestive that Margery is also offering an example and is in some way an intermediary between Christ and her readers. At the time of Margery’s life, the Legenda aurea was widely available in the vernacular, making it popular among the laity and female readers in particular. Imitating the style adopted by the male authors of traditional “Lives of Saints” narratives, Margery refers to herself as “creature,” which also lent her intensely subjective text a measure of objectivity and authority. 
Additionally, her Book is punctuated with many references to saints and other highly regarded spiritual figures including Katherine and Margaret (both of English importance), Bridget of Sweden, Marie d’Oignies, Elizabeth of Hungary, and as is often the case with female mystical literature, the Virgin and Mary Magdalene are also referenced. Bridget of Sweden, as discussed above, is a peculiar saint in that she was a wife and mother as well as a holy woman and author. Margery sees many similarities between Bridget’s biography and her own, and employs Bridget’s sanctity in an attempt at legitimize her own claims as a spiritual figure. Elizabeth of Hungary also entered the holy life after marriage and children, providing another bolster to Margery’s unusual religious life. Although never canonized, the Blessed Marie d’Oignies was famous for tears and other dramatic mystical displays, so Margery’s invoking of her also fortified her choice of spiritual devotion through tears and her dramatic public acts. 
        Though Margery is able to rhetorically situate herself within canonical spiritual references, in her daily life she was sometimes accused of being a Lollard. Lollardy was a heterodox and academic threat to religion during Margery’s time that originated in Oxford. Lollards were known to deny transubstantiation and question marriage, but over time anything that was considered to be heretical was equated with Lollardy. Margery, however, turns the accusations into her ability to show her gracefulness in the face of adversity. Moreover, she discusses the teaching that she had received in order to summon virtue (4):
For ever the more slander and reproof that she suffered, the more she increased in grace and in devotion of holy meditation of high contemplation and of wonderful speeches and dalliance which our Lord spoke and dallied to her soul, teaching her how she should be despised for his love, how she should have patience, setting all her trust, all her love, and all her affection in him only.
Here we see the use of the third person singular “her,” as well as how she is able to be taught by God to endure the suffering of others in order to devote her attention to divinity alone. She speaks of “devotion,” “meditation,” and “high contemplation,” as a nod to a more traditional feminine spirituality, even though she will go on to recount a rather unusual spiritual life especially within the context of England.
        Because Margery would spend so much time going on pilgrimages, she was able to get a sense of what life was like for continental religious women, which contrasted greatly with her experiences at home. As Liz Herbert McAvoy writes, “Whereas in England her sojourns are characterized by arrests and accusations and physical intimidation, in Italy she tends to find greater acceptance and accord” (21). Italy proves to be far more favorable and tolerant to Margery’s approach to mysticism, and continental pilgrimages succeeded in increasing her own sense of spiritual authority. Women in particular are in a position to give Margery greater acceptance within Italy, as they are familiar with — if not a part of — the pious and literary female spiritual community, and the home to many female saints. Margery provides an account of being overcome and collapsing while on pilgrimage in Italy, only to have a group of women recognize this as a sign of her devotion to God and take her in to care for her (43-4). She also recounts her experience with the Italian noblewoman Margaret Florentyne who cares generously for her and seeks advice from her in spiritual matters (95-6). Through her travels, Margery is empowered to gather authority from sources outside of a patriarchal and English context, looking towards other traditions, and especially towards what is offered through continental female mysticism that may be epitomized by the figure of Catherine, identifying instead with a different kind of female literary production and sanctity. 
In many ways the fact that neither Julian of Norwich nor Margery Kempe were canonized is indicative of English spirituality that placed an emphasis on martyrdom as a requirement of sanctity. However, there is more at play here as these two women did not enjoy the same type of network of well-connected religious, political, and literary figures that Catherine was connected to who worked to ensure that her afterlife was cared for and her sanctity legitimized. Though Julian of Norwich is revered due to her choice of becoming an anchoress, she does not have the mobility to make contact with others outside of her immediate geographical area. Margery Kempe, who does travel extensively, receives approval from Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Arundel, and also enjoys contact with Bishop of Lincoln Philip Repingdon and her own confessor Robert Spryngolde. Still, this is not enough in the face of the trials that she endured by other male religious who did not believe Margery’s acts to be holy. As both women attempted to remedy their female bodies with their religious devotion, they each took an extreme path that did not serve to ultimately canonize them. However, between these two women, it is possible to see the approach to female mysticism that is rendered in the English translation of the Orcherd of Syon, which rewrites Catherine’s text to be more in keeping with a quiet and less external approach that does not work to create a network of key figures but allows the woman to become, as Julian writes, “a mere wretch” who is forgotten despite being a teacher of God. 
        Ultimately, English devotional books written by female mystics and mediated in various ways by scribes and translators serve as a means to reinforce English-held beliefs regarding female spirituality and displays of religiosity. These texts often serve as conduct books, offering models for women, and giving them the opportunity to think critically, but at the same time closing off the ability for English women to engage in the world without repudiation. Women are barred from reading Catherine’s book without an intermediary frame, would read Julian of Norwich’s book from the perspective of a woman legitimized but almost entirely closed off from society, and if they had access to Margery Kempe’s words at all, they would have understood that her behavior was transgressive and ought not to be modeled. However, the engagement with texts not just from at home but from abroad would serve women over time as they were able to make their own choices regarding their approaches to spirituality and religiosity, as they would preserve these texts in their years in exile, and care for them to pass them on for future generations to interact with. 
________________
[1] Siena, Biblioteca comunale degli Intronati T.II.4, early 15th century.
[2] Madrid, Biblioteca Nacional de España 134 (B120), 14th century.
[3] Roma, Archivio Generale dell’Ordine dei Predicatori XIV .24, 14th century.
[4] Grenoble, Bibliothèque Municipale 404 (15th century); Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale de France, n.a.lat. 1250 (15th century); Città del Vaticano, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Vat. Lat. 939 (15th century).
[5] Though this may be somewhat the case in the Italian tradition, a number of Catherine’s letters were written by women, and she claims to have written in her own hand as well.
[6] From the University of Michigan’s Middle English Dictionary online, entry available here: http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/m/mec/med-idx?type=id&id=MED13700
[a]https://books.google.com/books?id=g1DeCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA218&lpg=PA218&dq=lyf+of+katherine+of+siena+english+translation&source=bl&ots=_OhtL3fRDF&sig=VSYcIwn4vdmeP8J6g1GqZZqbPRk&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjIz-uygv7RAhWIx4MKHR_yDJUQ6AEIHDAA#v=onepage&q=lyf%20of%20katherine%20of%20siena%20english%20translation&f=false
[b]https://books.google.com/books?id=_XuhL2SK4rsC&lpg=PA144&ots=54zqtptxxh&dq=chief%20criterion%20for%20English%20sanctity%20from%20the%20early%20Middle%20Ages%20through%20the%20Reformation%20despres&pg=PA143#v=onepage&q=chief%20criterion%20for%20English%20sanctity%20from%20the%20early%20Middle%20Ages%20through%20the%20Reformation%20despres&f=false
[c]to add
[d]https://books.google.com/books?id=cQDeCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA136&lpg=PA136&dq=manuscript+bodley+131&source=bl&ots=hZ8-ccqQOF&sig=yr_XW7aR1_5NcEw3PNA8jMfMs94&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiDqqyu9__RAhVH4YMKHe_7AggQ6AEILzAE#v=onepage&q=manuscript%20bodley%20131&f=false
[e]http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/m/mec/med-idx?type=id&id=MED13700&egs=all&egdisplay=open
[f]"In the Centre: Spiritual and Cultural Representations of Julian of Norwich in the Julian Centre." Sarah Law, pp.173-190
https://books.google.com/books?id=eZ-_AAAAQBAJ&lpg=PA184&ots=Q9P7B1z3Du&dq=margery%20kempe%20meets%20julian%20of%20norwich&pg=PR8#v=onepage&q=margery%20kempe%20meets%20julian%20of%20norwich&f=false
[g]https://books.google.com/books?id=t4vFdxYlRBgC&lpg=PA1&ots=YjriAxjsym&dq=Julian%20of%20Norwich%2C%20educated%20and%20relatively%20assured%2C%20deemed%20it%20appropriate%2C%20at%20least%20in%20her%20early%20text&pg=PA1#v=onepage&q=Julian%20of%20Norwich,%20educated%20and%20relatively%20assured,%20deemed%20it%20appropriate,%20at%20least%20in%20her%20early%20text&f=false
[h]https://books.google.com/books?id=xUTHp8gIjhgC&lpg=PA77&ots=L6E1019wZO&dq=he%20who%20never%20ceases%20to%20be%20the%20son%20of%20God%20who%20is%20also%20our%20mother&pg=PA77#v=onepage&q=he%20who%20never%20ceases%20to%20be%20the%20son%20of%20God%20who%20is%20also%20our%20mother&f=false