Lisa Tagliaferri
Lyrical Mysticism: The Writing and Reception of Catherine of Siena
Chapter IV


Financial Language in the Letters
        Catherine’s letters prove to be quite pragmatic and aware of her readership, providing worldly language, and monetary language in particular, as a means to drive home spiritual teachings. Though one may expect monetary analogies to be most effective with a lay and noble audience, Catherine also employs economic metaphors when writing letters addressed to religious recipients. As Catherine and her contemporaries were living during a time when the mercantile class was flourishing, trade was increasing, and written language was becoming more accessible to the general population (i.e., the rise of the vernacular in Europe), commercial and monetary concerns touched a greater portion of society. This blending of the spiritual and the earthly shows a careful negotiation of mixed signs that can at times seem contradictory, especially as Catherine’s teachings encourage poverty. The letters to nobles in particular must achieve a prudent balance in an effort to be complimentary to those who are likely providing some financial or political support to herself, and theological teachings that favor poverty over riches. 
  

In 39 letters, 15 of which were written to women, Catherine uses the economic metaphor of “l’arra,”[1] a word that Catherine also uses in the Dialogo[2] and which Suzanne Noffke explains “has the sense of a down payment, a pledge of future payment in full” (The Dialogue, 68). The 1612 edition of the Vocabolario dell’Accademia della Crusca (Venezia) provides the following definition for the word arra: “propriamente parte di pagamento della mercatantia pattuita, che si da al creditore per sicurtà, laquale, in caso, la mercatantia non si volesse, si perde.”[3] The word therefore has a sense of a deposit, a payment installment, or a guarantee that the item will be paid in full at a future point in time. In her letters, Catherine uses the phrases “l’arra d’inferno” (“down payment on hell”) and “l’arra di vita eterna,” (“down payment on the eternal life”) most frequently, with just “l’arra” used twice and “l’arra della morte eternale” used once to Raymond.[4] In the chart above, we can see that she uses the phrase “l’arra di vita eterna” most often for male religious, and more so for men than for women throughout each class (religious, noble, and lay), respectively. Women were far more likely to receive the phrase “l’arra d’inferno,” except for in the case of female religious. Catherine is therefore much more likely to tell women that they are making a down payment on hell while telling men that they are making a down payment on the eternal life in paradise. 
Striking a parallel between financial language and spiritual matters is not original, but Catherine uses this analogy frequently. The Latin Vulgate version (the one Catherine would have been familiar with) of the Epistle to the Ephesians (the tenth book of the New Testament) includes the passage “qui est pignus hereditatis nostrae in redemptionem adquisitionis in laudem gloriae ipsius” (Ephesians 1:14).[5] Both “pignus” and “adquisitionis” have economic connotations, with “pignus” referring to a pledge (or security for debt) or a mortgage, and “adquisitionis” referring to an acquisition.[6] Following the canonical text of the Bible ensures that Catherine is not using language that is far removed from tradition, which could serve to protect her as a woman writing about spiritual matters. As neither of the Latin words used in Ephesians are a cognate for “arra,” it is worth noting that Dante does use this word in Purgatorio: “Lo sommo Ben, che solo esso a sé piace, / fé l’uom buono e a bene, e questo loco / diede per arr’ a lui d’etterna pace” (28, 91-93, emphasis mine).[7] Dante uses this language in the passage narrated by Matilda in the earthly paradise, where she gives the historical context of Eden and explains that “the high Good” paid a down payment to man for eternal peace. Even predating Dante, is the work of female mystic Angela da Foligno, whose Latin text, often referred to as her “Libro” (as with Catherine’s Dialogo), also uses the word “arra:” 
Studeamus igitur sustinere tribulationes temporales cum patientia, immo & cum gaudio. In eis enim signum recipimus, quod sumus dilecti & electi ab amato, & recipimus arram suae haereditatis (Angela da Foligno, Angela de Fulginio 390, emphasis mine).[8] 
Angela is directly referring to the Epistle to the Ephesians, which may indicate that in oral language people were substituting the word “arra” for “pignus” in 13th- and 14th-century Italy. Even if this were not the case, the use of the common word of “arra” suggests again that there is an exchange between mystical and poetic writing, as writers in both genres are using this specific financial word to write about spirituality. 
In one of Catherine’s letters to Don Giovanni dalle Celle, a Vallombrosan whom she met at his hermitage outside Florence in 1374, she explains that those who are full of love for God taste the down payment they make on the eternal life, while those who direct love to themselves taste the deposit they make on hell (T322):
Non gli è duro il portare pena nè fadiga; anco gli è diletto, perchè con odio santo ha abbandonato sè medesimo, onde riluce in lui la virtù della pazienza, con le sue sorelle, cioè fortezza e longa perseveranzia. Questi gusta l’arra di vita eterna: siccome quegli che stanno nell'amore proprio,gustano l’arra dell'inferno; perchè sono fatti incomportabili a loro medesimi, amando disordinatamente sè e le creature e le cose create.[9]
The letter, believed to be dated shortly after December 13, 1378, is the second letter she has addressed to Don Giovanni dalle Celle, and in it, she encourages him to follow through to be present at the council of the servants of God that Urban VI had invited him to join in Rome. The letter deals with the theme of charity, which she refers to as a “dolce madre” (“sweet mother”), and she explains that she is sure that if his love were to be consumed in the oven of divine charity he will certainly leave behind his selfish love, but she constructs her letter to suggest that his responding positively to the invitation from the pope is a kind of test of this love:
Or m’avvedrò se voi sarete amatori di Dio e della reformazione di santa Chiesa, e se voi non ragguarderete alle proprie consolazioni. Son certa che, se voi averete consumato l'amore proprio in questa fornace, voi non curerete d’abbandonare la cella e le vostre consolazioni; ma piglierete la cella del cognoscimento di voi, e con essa verrete a ponere la vita, se bisognerà, per la verità dolce. Altrimenti, no. E però vi dissi ch’io desideravo di vedere consumato ogni amore proprio di voi nella fornace della divina carità.[10]
As one of her “staunchest defenders,” Don Giovanni dalle Celle was likely living a life consistent with what Catherine describes as being a lover of God, but in this letter she is setting out to ensure that he will dedicate himself to reform the Church (Noffke, Letters Vol. IV, 35). By setting up the financial dichotomy between those who direct their love towards God in the act of divine charity, and those who direct their love inwards towards selfish comforts, Catherine is able to emphasize that these choices serve as deposits on the eternal life.
        In a series of letters Catherine uses variations on the theme of the down payment, which seems to be indicative of the spiritual growth of the addressee. Serving as a patron and disciple to Catherine, Ristoro di Piero Canigiani was a learned lawyer as well as a leading Guelf in Florence. The son of Piero Canigiani and older brother of Barduccio, he acted in a political capacity on behalf of Florence in dealings with Queen Giovanna of Naples and Gregory XI. Catherine first writes to support him through the Revolt of the Ciompi, a rebellion of unrepresented laborers that began in Florence in 1378. The houses of prominent Guelfs — considered to be enemies of the people — were looted and burned around June 22, 1378, and his house and his father’s were among those that were damaged. His father was also exiled from the city. Catherine does not explicitly mention these events in her first letter to Ristoro, T299, but mentions a tragic event in his life, causing Noffke to date this to July 1378 (Letters III, 160). In this letter, she discusses how loving material goods is problematic, because those are only loaned to us, and we will be parted with those goods either during life (when God wills it), or when we die. If people love with sensual love, and with love of the world and its pleasures, people make down payments on hell, as she mentions twice in this single letter:
 Questo è quello miserabile amore che tolle il lume della ragione, e non lassa cognoscere la verità; tolle la vita della Grazia, e dacci la morte; tolleci la libertà, e facciservi e schiavi del peccato, che è quella cosa che non è: onde in questa vita gusta l’arra dell’inferno.[11]
...
Egli è fatto incomportabile a sè medesimo: onde gusta l’arra dell’inferno; però che il vermine della coscienzia sempre rode. [12]
What is significant in these instances is that Catherine contextualizes the love of money and possessions with the idea of a down payment, striking a very apt parallel that can prove to be effective for those in the noble class, especially at a time when those in Florence are suffering from having lost many of their earthly possessions. Catherine’s letter continues to explain that the love of God, which can be manifested in acts of charity, is a love that cannot be taken away as sensual love can. She writes, “E però questi cotali di neuna cosa possono avere pena, perocchè hanno posto l’amore e l’affetto in quella cosa che non gli può essere tolta,”[13] insisting that those who order their lives around God — acting with integrity in marriage, raising children to love God, and doing works of charity — will suffer no pain because love and affection cannot be taken away from them.
        Based on the next letter addressed to him (T258), it is clear that Catherine had received a letter from Ristoro in which he described his commitment to reforming his life. She responded some time prior to August 10, “when the lifting of the interdict was publicly proclaimed in Florence” (Noffle Letters III 170). In this letter, Catherine discusses her happiness to see his “santo desiderio” (“holy desire”), explaining that his effort to forgive those who had wronged him will ensure that he lives in grace and peace. Those who live in hatred, however, “è privato di Dio, e sta in stato di dannazione; e in questa vita gusta l’arra dell’inferno: perocchè sempre si rode in sè medesimo, e appetisce vendetta, e sta sempre con timore.”[14] Again, there is the worldly image of making a deposit on the infernal afterlife through hatred, revenge, and fear. As the analogy had worked effectively in letter T299, Catherine uses it again, urging the noble Ristoro to continue to redirect his devotion to temporal possessions towards God instead. Catherine’s letter moves on to advise him to unburden his conscience of whatever he thinks is weighing it down, offering him concrete actionable tasks that she enumerates for his benefit. The fourth item that Catherine advises Ristoro on is his marriage:
Aggiungoci una cosa: che nello stato del matrimonio voi stiate con timore di Dio, e con riverenzia v’andiate come a sacramento, e non con disordinato desiderio. E i dì che sono comandati dalla santa Chiesa, abbiate in debita riverenzia, siccome uomo ragionevole, e non come animale bruto. Allora di voi e di lei, siccome arbori buoni, producerete buoni frutti.[15]
Despite her lack of earthly experience in the domain of human marriage, Catherine is able to offer advice on best practices, revealing her adeptness at being aware of her audience and constructing spiritual paths that are attainable across personal circumstances.
        In T301, her last letter to Ristoro, which Noffke dates later than T279 to mid-November 1378, Catherine implies that the recipient and his wife are earnestly considering the abstinence she had recommended in previous letters (Letters, Vol. III, 332). Catherine is very happy for his commitment to spiritual love, and as she wants to see him continue to grow in “il lume e la virtù” (“light and virtue”), she tells him to focus on a few things. Again, these are very task-oriented, providing Ristoro with particular actions to carry out. As part of contextualizing the list as well as encouraging him to follow a virtuous path, she writes, “La virtù gli è tanto piacevole, che dell’uomo virtuoso egli ne fa un altro sè per affetto dolce d’amore; e in questa vita gli fa gustare l’arra di vita eterna: che stando nel mare tempestoso delle molte fadighe e amaritudini, gusta la pace e la dolcezza.”[16] In this letter there is a shift from a down payment on hell to a deposit or a pledge of eternal life. Catherine’s letters to Ristoro reveal a trajectory towards spiritual growth including some kind of virtuous spiritual attainment through Catherine’s financial knowledge that moves the recipient as paying down for a place in Hell to securing a position in Paradise instead. However, rather than Ristoro pledging money on eternal life, it seems more likely in this context that in return for virtuosity, God is offering a backed pledge on the eternal life to Ristoro, such that he can taste peace and sweetness during his time on Earth through doing good in the world. 
        Indeed, people on Earth are not the only ones engaging in financial exchanges, as Catherine explicitly discusses Christ’s making a financial pledge to his followers in a letter to the Queen of Naples, Giovanna d’Angiò (T143). By adding the verb “pagare” (“to pay”) alongside “l’arra,” Catherine makes the monetary image even more explicit. She writes:
O dolcissimo amore Gesù, in segno che tu l’avevi presa per sposa, in capo degli otto dì tu le donasti l’anello della dolcissima e santissima mano tua, nel tempo della santa Circoncisione. Così sapete voi, venerabile madre mia, che in capo degli otto dì, se silevò tanta carne quanta è un cerchio d'anello, e cominciò a pagarci l’arra, per darci pienamente speranza del pagamento, il quale ricevemmo in su ‘l legno della santissima croce, quando questo sposo, Agnello immacolato, fu svenato, e da ogni parte versò abbondanzia di sangue col quale lavò le immondizie e peccati della sposa sua, cioè l’umana generazione.[17]
Catherine’s imagery of Christ’s circumcision is unique to her, though Dupré Theseider suggests that there may be a basis for it in Exodus 4, 25-26 (n. 4).[18] In comparing Christ’s foreskin to a ring, she is giving it earthly value. In other letters in which she describes Christ’s foreskin to a ring given to his followers, she provides additional details in abstentia for the ring: it is neither gold nor silver.[19] Christ’s foreskin being implicitly likened to precious metals provides added financial value to the ring, yet Catherine emphasizes that the foreskin is worth so much more, as it is made of Christ’s flesh and indicative of his first pain, that it is even better than a monetary pledge of the crucifixion to come. As Caroline Walker Bynum notes, “But Catherine herself, in letter after letter, says we do not marry Christ with gold or silver but with the ring of Christ’s foreskin, given in the Circumcision and accompanied by pain and the shedding of blood … shed for the sake of the world” (Holy Feast, Holy Fast 175). The blood and flesh shed during Christ’s circumcision are a small sacrifice that show Christ’s commitment to his followers, and is the first payment he makes to them. Eventually, he pays for all of their sins in full through his crucifixion, inviting them all to the wedding feast that they will find in Paradise.
        The imagery of the wedding is canonical in Christian writing, but it brings with it additional layers of earthly and financial imagery. Following the excerpt quoted above in T143 to Giovannad’Angiò, the letter continues:
E attendete, che il fuoco della divina Carità ci ha donato l’anello non d’oro, ma della purissima carne sua; e hacci fatte le nozze, questo dolcissimo Padre, non di carne d’animale, ma del prezioso corpo suo: ed è questo cibo e Agnello arrostito al fuoco della Carità in su il legno della dolce croce. Adunque io vi prego dolcissimamente in Cristo Gesù, che il cuore e l’anima con ogni suo affetto e movimento e sollecitudine si levi ad amare e a servire sì dolce e caropadre e sposo quanto è Dio, somma e eterna Verità, quale ci amò veramente, e senza essere amato.[20]
As in other letters, the ring here is described as being more valuable than gold, and the feast of the wedding is a feast on the body of Christ. The flame that cooks the flesh is the fire of caritas, and the wood on which it is cooked is that of the cross. All of the material goods of the wedding are brought by God, including the ring and the banquet, and love is paid to the followers of God with no expectation of reciprocation, though Catherine urges followers to love and serve. Paying for a wedding, and paying a dowry (though Christ is typically depicted as the bridegroom rather than the bride), are all financial circumstances that Catherine’s contemporaries would have understood. They would also understand faithfulness as an integral component of marriage, which Catherine goes onto describe later in the letter: “prima che romper la fede allo Sposo eterno suo.”[21] Catherine’s letters explain to their recipients that Christ makes a down payment with his circumcision and a full payment with his crucifixion to ensure that his followers can live an eternal life, but it is necessary that his followers do not counter this payment with their own payments on hell instead.
        As Christ has made a full payment on the eternal life for the sake of his followers, all are indebted to him. To capture the significance of what Christians owe to God, Catherine uses the language of being in debt, and of sinners as being debtors (and indeed, all humans are sinners to some degree). This symbolism is used in chapter 25 of her Dialogo, where she asks why he is so merciful: “Chi ti muove a fare tanta misericordia? L’amore; non il debito o il bisogno che tu abbia di noi, poiché noi siamo rei e malvagi debitori” (emphasis mine).[22] The answer that it is love that compels God to be so merciful to his followers, as he has no real need of the wicked debtors. Catherine uses the word “debito” in 101 of her letters, about 26% of her extant letters. Indebtedness, and its intersections with broader economic language, is an important aspect of Catherine’s spirituality, and throughout her corpus of letters, she uses the symbolism in a different manner.  To exemplify her varied approaches, we will consider three letters in particular, one to Niccolò Soderini, one to an unnamed homosexual, and one to the Defenders of the People and the City of Florence. 
        Noffke dates letter T171 to late February 1376, when Niccolò di Ruggero (Geri) Soderini was one of the priori delle Arti in Florence (Noffke, Letters, Vol. II, 22). It is likely that Soderini had become Catherine’s friend and disciple during her 1374 stay in Florence, and we have three letters in total written to him (T131 was dated earlier, and T247 later). In addition to focusing on the idea of indebtedness, this letter also takes up the words “legare” (to bind), “lega” (league), and “legame” (bond), suggestive of Florence’s intention to join the antipapal league which was not formalized until July 24th of that year. Throughout this letter, Catherine makes use of several themes and word plays, showing her ability to imbue her letters with complicated and intertwined messages. In this letter, the language around indebtedness likens the relationship between Christians and God to the relationship between a son and his father. The son is forever indebted to his father for having been made of his flesh, and for having been given this flesh without having asked. She writes:
O non può mai offenderlo (né debbe offendere) che non sia in pericolo di morte, e in stato di dannazione. Egli è sempre debitore a lui, per l’essere che gli ha dato: e non pregò mai il figliuolo il padre, che gli desse della sustanzia della carne sua; nondimeno il padre, mosso per l’amore ch'egli ha al figliuolo prima ch’egli abbia l’essere, gliel dà. Oh quanto maggiormente noi ignoranti ingrati sconoscenti figliuoli possiamo patire di offendere il nostro vero Padre! Conciossiacosaché ci abbia amati senza essere amato; perocché per amore ci creò e anco ci ricreò a Grazia nel sangue suo … e tutto ci ha dato per grazia, e non per debito.[23]
As the son should never offend the father, Christians should never offend God, indeed it would be considered a worse transgression, and is viewed as pursuing death for having flagrantly gone against the one who granted life. Catherine is also incredibly clear in her analogy, not only does she refer to “vero Padre” in the quote above, but earlier in the letter she also writes, “Adunque con sollicitudine d’andare a dimandare l’adiutorio del Padre, cioè di Dio, conviencelo addimandare.”[24] Other imagery in the letter calls to mind Dante’s schismatics of Canto 28, as she discusses cutting and joining, conflating their schism-inducing behavior of considering to join the antipapal league with the financial trope of being indebt and not making the appropriate payments, as though being in debt cuts one off from the greater whole.
Letter T21, dated to between February and April 1376, and believed to have been written during Holy Week (April 6-11), is written to a man who is described as having engaged in homosexual acts, whom she addresses in the formal voi, and whose name has since been scratched out. Noffke notes that the rubric reveals that here is a place where the copyist deliberately removed the name of the recipient, and also omitted “some words unfitting for anyone to know,” which Noffke posits to be “something Catherine regarded as even worse than homosexual behavior” (Noffke, Letters, Vol. II, 144). Using similar language to the down payment, but instead constructing it as a debt, she uses variations of the word debito 11 times throughout this 1,400-word letter. In the first few lines alone she writes the word five times (emphasis mine):
...scrivo a voi nel prezioso sangue suo; con desiderio di vedervi debitore reale, che rendiate il debito vostro al vostro Creatore. Sapete che siamo tutti debitori a Dio... Non pregammo mai che ci creasse: mosso dunque dal fuoco dell’amore; creocci all’immagine e similitudine sua.... Questo è il debito che noi abbiamo tratto da Dio: e questo debito vuole che gli sia renduto: cioè amore per amore.[25]
As in the letter cited above, here Catherine again discusses the debt that must be repaid as love for God, as humanity is created in God’s image due to his being moved by the fire of love. As a debtor, the recipient is constructed as an ignorant thief — “O ladro ignorante debitore”[26] — who steals from his creator. Significantly, both in this phrase and in the phrase “debitore reale” at the start of the letter, Catherine calls this man a debtor outright, though in other letters she refers to all Christians as debtors. Because of her perceived gravity of his sin, Catherine believes herself to be justified in being more direct and does not speak in analogies. 
As the letter continues Catherine writes that we all shall pay our debts, but if the debt is not properly repaid, her addressee will suffer the consequences: “renderemo il debito che dobbiamo rendere a Dio. Sappiate che se voi nol rendeste, voi cadereste nella più scura prigione che si possa immaginare”[27] (T21). This man must confess and hold his sin in contempt to return his debt or he will fall into the darkest prison imaginable (i.e. Hell). Of course, this is not entirely without reference to a Scriptural basis, as she echoes Mark 12:17 when she tells the homosexual to give to God what is his and to the earth what is the earth’s (give to Caesar what is Caesar’s), but her choice of words and repetition shows her position as a public and rhetorical figure working to persuade others. As Cheryl Forbes notes, “Catherine’s images here … are earthly, not heavenly; they are concrete, not abstract” (135). Using language that conjures the economic realm, Catherine is able to appeal to her contemporaries in words that they can easily relate to as metaphors for what is at stake in their spiritual lives.
        Letter T311 differs from the previous two in that it is more explicitly political, addressed to the Sienese government writ large (“A’ signori difensori del popolo e comune di Siena”[28]). Believed to be written some time between October and mid-November 1379, this letter does not shy away from the language of indebtedness, employing variations of the word 12 times in a 1,460-word letter, but the use of the word “debitori” (“debtors”) is more tempered here. Unlike in T21, Catherine does not directly call the signori this word as such, instead explaining that “we” are debtors: “A cui siamo noi debitori?”[29] She explains that we are debtors to God, Church, our neighbors, and ourselves. In the second instance of the word “debitori,” it appears as an analogy: “come ladri a malvagi debitori, tollendo l’altrui con molta ingiustizia.”[30] Whereas the homosexual in the letter above is referred to as a thieving debtor outright, the political leaders of Siena are only compared to thieving debtors. This discussion of indebtedness touches on similar themes of the other letters, and ends with a call to action, as do many of her letters and as discussed above with regards to her letters to Ristoro. She appeals to the Defenders to repay what they owe to God and to give Christ deeds rather than words:
Adunque, vedete che per ogni modo sete tenuti e obligati di rendere il debito alla santa Chiesa e al padre vostro … Pregovi per l’amore di Cristo crocifisso, che voi non diate più parole a Cristo in terra; ma dategli de’ fatti, erendetegli di quello che egli ha dato voi.[31]
Catherine wants the Sienese to remember that they are obligated to pay gratitude (their debts) to Urban VI for his having lifted Gregory XI’s interdict that prohibited Florence and allied cities from participating in public worship and receiving sacraments, and also to recall that Urban VI is the legitimate Pope. 
If the Sienese are successful in repaying their debts in the actions she details, Catherine explains that they will be rewarded not just in the afterlife but on Earth as well. By the end of the letter, she becomes quite specific to her point, explaining how their good deeds can help them recover the port of Talamone from the Pisans through the mediation of the Pope that she will help to orchestrate.[32] Thus, even though Catherine generally constructs indebtedness as loving oneself over God, and favoring time on Earth over concern about the eternal soul, Catherine makes allowances. Understanding the political gains that could be enjoyed through Siena working to legitimize Pope Urban VI against the antipope, Catherine promises earthly power to the government in the form of their regaining access to a port hold at Talamone. Though Catherine can afford to be more spiritually minded in her interactions with individuals, even when incorporating worldly financial language, she must be pragmatic in her political dealings for what she must have perceived to be the greater good of the Church and the faith.
        Because many of Catherine’s interlocutors have the earthly power and financial backing to help her spiritual causes, she must often tread carefully in her letters to them. Though she may say to Madonna Jacoma, the widow of the Lord of Fuligno, that “Elle danno, dico, molestia e scandalo le cose del mondo a chi le possiede fuori di Dio,”[33] her advice is generalized, and can be shifted depending on what she hopes to achieve (T264). Sometimes, she grants that God does give us enjoyable belongings and feelings on Earth, but that these pleasures are intended to serve a greater good, as she notes in a letter to Monna Stricca, the wife of Cione di Sandro Salimbeni (T110):
Onde la ricchezza ci permette, perchè ne siamo disponsatori a’ poveri; le delizie e stati del mondo, non perchè noi leviamo il capo per la superbia: anco, molto maggiormente ci dobbiamo umiliare con un santo ringraziamento della divina bontà.[34]
Riches are permitted, but they should be redistributed to the poor; prosperity should remind us to be thankful to God. This is to say that the meditation on wealth, objects, and opportunities should be directed towards God and the eternal soul rather than to the earthly possessions or temporal states themselves; when one is presented with favorable fortune, they should ask themselves how they can do good works and serve God with it.
Unlike what is recounted in Matthew 19:24, that “it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God,” Catherine — with her mercantile background and desire to see political stability between Europe and the Church — accepts that there is a time and a place for wealth and power. Lorenzo del Pino, a nobleman from Bologna and a doctor and lecturer in ecclesiastical law at the university there, had inherited substantial wealth by the time Catherine writes letter T193 to him. While she mentions that “Cristo abbracciò la povertà volontaria,” she attempts to strike a middle ground with Lorenzo, who must be living like the wretches mentioned in the letter who hate truth. She writes:
Le ricchezze e lo stato del mondo, se l’uomo le vuol tenere, il può; e non offende Dio né l’anima sua; ma se egli le lassasse, sarebbe maggior perfezione, però che maggior perfezione è a lassare che a tenere. Ma s’egli non vuole lassare attualmente, debbe lassare e rifiutare col santo desiderio, e non ponere in loro il suo principale affetto, ma solo in Dio; e tenerle per uso a’ suoi bisogni e della sua famigliae come cosa prestata, e non come cosa sua. Facendo così non riceve pena mai d’alcuna cosa creata; perocché la cosa che non si possiede per amore, non si perde mai con dolore.[35]
Riches and status in the world do not offend God or the eternal soul, even though it would be more perfect to let these things go. The important aspect of one’s relationship with that status and money or possessions is to perceive them as the temporal states and objects that they are. Catherine recommends seeing the prestige and riches as that which is lent to the possessor, rather than that which is owned outright by them. This important relationality, the knowledge that “ogni cosa passa,”[36] serves to redirect vices towards virtues that mediate on a power higher than the self, while also allowing Catherine to make use of these temporal states in her work for the Church (T193). 
Though Catherine lived in poverty by choice and did good works for the poor, Catherine had a large network of support that intersected with well-connected nobility and religious figures, perhaps leaving her with less of an understanding of all the possible realities of others. Towards the end of a letter to a prostitute of Perugia, she writes: “E se tu mi dicessi: «il non avere di che vivere mi ritrae»; e io ti dico che Dio ti provvederà”[37] (T276). Though we do not know the circumstances of this woman, she likely did not have a choice in the way she chose to support herself. While Catherine states that she hears the prostitute’s brother will support her (the letter was written at the request of one of the woman’s brothers), clearly the woman in question had not previously had this support, so the implied assistance seems tenuous at best. Though economic imagery is particularly fitting for a prostitute addressee, it seems uneven for Catherine to grant to rich patrons the solace that they are not living in sin despite their wealth, while to a prostitute she does not offer much other than empty words relating that “God will provide for you” when evidently he has not. To the prostitute as well as to the homosexual in letter T21, Catherine is less tempered and more dogmatic in her condemnation of their particular sins of the flesh, offering them less comfort than she does for those who are valuable to her cause. 
Catherine’s use of financial metaphors can make the spiritual more commonplace and quotidian, and perhaps easier for some to understand. As a spiritual woman, Catherine remains outside of city commerce, as she lives more for her future heavenly life than for her current earth-bound one, but her use of monetary language shows her civic-mindedness, as she is employing a tangible financial contract in order to relate spiritual matters to a class of people within an increasingly mercantile society. In utilizing monetary language in letters about spiritual matters, Catherine strikes a careful balance between two often oppositional schools of thought, bringing them to bear on each other in a meaningful way to better teach her readers and remain as a figure embedded within two spheres. Ultimately, this speaks to her positionality as a mystic who is concerned with both this-worldly and other-worldly concerns at once. 


________________
[1] In modern Italian editions, this word is rendered as “la caparra,” as in the 2006 Edizione Cantagalli.
[2] Chapter 28, “Bene è dunque macto colui che schifa tanto bene, ed elegge innanzi, di gustare in questa vita l’arra de l’inferno, tenendo per la via di sotto, dove va con molte fadighe e senza neuno refrigerio e senza veruno bene; però che per lo peccato loro sonno privati di me che so’ sommo ed etterno Bene” (emphasis mine).
[3] Available via http://vocabolario.sns.it/html/_s_index2.html. 
[4] T65, T322, T76, T359, T39, T331, T244, T83, T124, T241, T216, T64, T85, T301, T340, T335, T44, T38, T151a, T369, T355, T361, T299, T264, T360, T111, T310, T5, T20, T194, T258, T3, T276, T304, T48, T84, T143, T221, T104
[5] Available via https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Ephesians+1%3A14-16&version=VULGATE. “which is the pledge of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of His glory” (https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Ephesians%201:13-15&version=KJ21)
[6] Definitions available via http://latin-dictionary.net/. 
[7] “The Highest Good, whose sole joy is Himself, / made man to be-and to enact-good; He / gave man this place as pledge of endless peace” Trans. Mandelbaum. 
[8] An Italian translation from 1604 reads: “Affatichiamoci di soffrire co[n] patienza le tribolationi té porali, poiche i[n] esse riceviamo il segno, che dall’amato nostro siamo tenuti cari, & riceviamo un’arra dell’heredità del Paradiso” (Trans. Girolamo Giovannini, 123 v, emphasis mine).
[9] Noffke translates “gusta l'arra” as “foretaste” rather than “taste the deposit”: “It’s not hard for them to bear pain and labor; in fact, it’s a joy because they have in holy hatred let go of themselves, and so the virtue of patience shines brightly in them, along with her sister virtues, fortitude and enduring perseverance. They have a foretaste of eternal life, just as those who live in selfish love have a foretaste of hell because they have become unbearable to themselves by loving themselves and other people and created things in a disordered way.”
[10] “Now I shall see whether you are a zealous lover of God and of the reform of holy Church, and whether you are unconcerned about you selfish comforts. I am certain that if you have had your selfish love consumed in this oven you won’t mind leaving your cell and your comforts. Instead you will take to the cell of self-knowledge, and there come to the point of laying down your life, if need be, for sweet Truth. But not otherwise. And this is why I said I long to see all your selfish love consumed in the oven of divine charity” (Trans. Noffke). 
[11] Noffke again translates the two instances in this letter as a “foretaste of hell:” “This is the wretched love that takes away the light of reason and keeps us from knowing the truth. It robs us of the life of grace and gives us death. It deprives us of liberty and makes us servants and slaves of sin, the thing that is not. And so in this life we have a foretaste of hell.”
[12] “We become unbearable to ourselves. We have a foretaste of hell because the worm of conscience gnaws away continually” (Trans. Noffke).
[13] “People who act in this way are pained by nothing, since they have set their love and affection on what cannot be taken away from them” (Trans. Noffke). 
[14] “...have lost God and are living in damnation; even in this life they experience a foretaste of hell. They are constantly eaten up inside, hungry for revenge and in continual fear” (Trans. Noffke).
[15] “I’ll add one thing more. Live in the state of marriage with fear of God; approach it with reverence as a sacrament, and not with uncontrolled desire. Have due respect for the days commanded by holy Church, as a reasonable man, not as a brute animal. Then the two of you, like good trees, will produce good fruit.”
[16] “Virtue … is so pleasing to God that in love’s affection he makes the virtuous person another himself; in this life he lets that person experience eternal life, so that he or she tastes peace and sweetness even on the stormy sea of bitterness and difficulty” (Trans. Noffke). 
[17] “Oh Jesus, gentlest love, as a sign that you had espoused us you gave us the ring of your most holy and tender flesh at the time of your holy circumcision on the eighth day. You know, my revered mother, that on the eighth day just enough flesh was taken from him to make a circlet of a ring. To give us a sure hope of payment in full he began by paying this pledge. And we received the full payment on the wood of the most holy cross, when this Bridgegroom, the spotless Lamb, poured out his blood freely from every member and with it washed away the filth and sin of humankind his spouse” (italicized text Noffke’s). 
[18] “Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me. So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision,” King James, available http://biblehub.com/kjv/exodus/4.htm 
[19] Other letters that have the imagery of the foreskin ring are T221, T50, T261. See also Prayer 25.
[20] “Notice that the fire of divine charity gave us a ring not of gold but of his own purest flesh. This gentlest of fathers celebrated his wedding with us in a feast not of animal flesh but of his own precious body. This food is Lamb, roasted over the fire of charity on the wood of the sweet cross. So I beg you most courteously in Christ Jesus to lift up your heart and soul with all your affection, energy, and caring, to love and serve so gentle and dear a Father and Spouse as God, high eternal Truth, who tenderly loved us without being loved” (Trans. Noffke).
[21] “...we would sooner die than break faith with our eternal Spouse” (Trans. Noffke). 
[22] “What could move you to such mercy? Neither duty nor any need you have of us (we are sinful and wicked debtors!) — but only love!” (Trans. Noffke). 
[23] “No, the son neither can nor should offend his father without courting death and condemnation. He is forever indebted to his father for the existence his father has given him. The son never asked his father to give him a share of his own flesh, and yet he did, moved by the love he had for his son even before he existed. How much less, then, should we foolish heedless ungrateful children be able to bear offending our true Father! For he loved us without being loved. Out of love he created us, and then created us anew to grace in his blood. ... and all this not because it is due us, but by grace.” (Trans. Noffke)
[24] “So you must go — and quickly — to ask for your Fathers (I mean God’s) help.” (Trans. Noffke)
[25] “I long to see you an honorable debtor, paying what you owe your Creator. You know we are all in God’s debt… We never asked to be created. Moved by the fire of love, God created us in his own image and likeness… This is the debt we have incurred with God, and God wants this debt repaid: love for love. (Trans. Noffke, emphasis mine)
[26] “Oh foolish debtor thief!” (Trans. Noffke).
[27] “We shall pay the debt we owe to God. Realize that if you don’t pay it, you will land in the darkest prison you can imagine.”
[28] “To the Defenders of the People and the City of Siena.” (Trans. Noffke)
[29] “To whom are we debtors?” (Trans. mine)
[30] “Like thieves and wicked debtors, we take from others very unjustly.” (Trans. Noffke)
[31] “Therefore, you all see that for each way you are held to and obliged to return the debt to holy Church and your father … I pray to you all, for the love of Christ crucified, don’t continue to say more words about Christ on earth, but give him deeds, return to him that which he has given you.” (Trans. mine)
[32] Though after Siena did reconcile with the papacy and Urban VI offered to return Talamone to Siena, the Pisans refused. Siena did eventually recover the port in February 1379 through the mediation of Cardinal Badoero (Noffke, Letters, Vol. VI, p. 311). 
[33] “The things of the world are stumbling blocks and trouble for those who possess them apart from God.” (Trans. Noffke)
[34] “God permits us to have wealth so that we may be its administrators for the poor. [He gives us] worldly pleasure and prosperity not to make us lift up our heads in pride, but rather than we should humble ourselves all the more in holy thanksgiving for divine goodness.” (Trans. Noffke)
[35] “If you want to have wealth and worldly prestige you can, without offense to God or harm to your soul. Still, it would be more perfect to abandon these things, because is more perfect to let them go than to possess them. If you don’t want to leave them in actuality, then you ought to let them go and renounce them in holy desire by giving your first love not to them but to God alone and by using them according to your own needs and your family’s, as something lent to you and not your own. If you do this you will never suffer harm from any created thing, because we never grieve over the loss of what we have not loved possessively.” (Trans. Noffke)
[36] “all things pass.” (Trans. mine)
[37] “And if you should say to me, ‘Not having anything to live on keeps me from [withdrawing]’ I tell you God will provide for you.” (Trans. Noffke).