Lisa Tagliaferri
Lyrical Mysticism: The Writing and Reception of Catherine of Siena
Chapter III




Catherine’s Letter Writing and Her Italian Network
        As I gestured in Chapter 1 on the collaborative nature of writing, here I will begin to pull this apart in terms of discussing the social network that Catherine cultivated around herself, which in turn fostered her writing and readership, and drove her reception and legacy after her death. This chapter will consider the connections that Catherine made in her lifetime that are illuminated historically through her letter production, as well as analyze the strategic and rhetorical nature of her letters. Catherine’s letters are persuasive, evocative, and lyrical[a], and serve as a material extension of her spirituality and political engagement[b], as well as markers of the many friendships she formed and nurtured throughout her life. Collected along with her Dialogo after her death, the letters were published first in a small collection of 31 letters printed by Fontanesi (Bologna, 1492), and were later followed by an edition of 353 letters printed by Aldo Manuzio (Venice, 1500) (Cavallini[c] xiv).
In his book The Art of the Network: Strategic Interaction and Patronage in Renaissance Florence, Paul D. McLean discusses the role that letters play in building and sustaining relationships in 15th-century Italy. As a sociologist, he reflects broadly on how social interactions shape the lives of individuals, and how individuals are defined by those around them (1-2):
Our careers are made — and we are made — through our interactions with others, as well as through the performance of those tasks to which we have access by virtue of our connections to others. We become more fully the persons we are through interaction, our personhood being constructed out of a number of different identities we adopt, singly or in combination, in different interactional settings. We may achieve autonomy, and achieve a private conception of self independent of attributions of identity put upon us by others, through the accumulation of multiple network ties and participation in social interaction coursing across multiple networks and diverse cultural domains.
A daughter of a wool-dyer father, Catherine grew up in a non-noble family that had some ties to religious professions. Despite her status as a 14th-century woman, Catherine managed to interact with people of high position through her persuasive writing (and speech acts)[1], spirituality, and commitment to the social good. She maintained interactions across multiple networks — the lay, religious, and nobility — and through diverse cultural domains that extended beyond her home city of Siena. Her career — which included the roles of mystic, writer, ambassador, and what we may anachronistically call social worker — was largely successful due to the formation of her social ties. Though historically we cannot fully examine all the historical temporal-based works that she did to develop the network around her, the collection of her letters that we have provide an indication of the remarkable life that she negotiated for herself.
Catherine’s letter-writing career begins before 1374 and extends to February 15, 1380, about two months before her death at the age of 33. Her letters were addressed to men and women geographically located throughout Siena, Tuscany, and beyond the Italian peninsula. Today we have 386 of her letters extant, though these are not wholly intact, as “inspiration and edification were the purposes of those who were preparing the letters for dissemination, [with] all that was purely personal or informational [being] irrelevant” (Noffke, Letters, xxv). The versions of the letters that we have are based primarily on a canonization project, and today we only have the original transcriptions of eight of the letters (Noffke, Letters, xxii). Though we cannot be certain that we have access to some form of all the letters that she wrote, nor can we be absolutely sure that these letters are written and copied as Catherine intended as there were many opportunities for alterations,[2] I agree with Noffke’s assertion that “There is little cause … to question the essential authenticity of the text as we have it, even though it is not in Catherine’s own hand” (Noffke, Letters, xxiii). This collection of letters, therefore, provides a revealing glimpse into Catherine’s historical reality and serves as a document of her literary power. 
Though Catherine opted to use the Italian language throughout her writing and correspondence (as discussed above), her reach crossed linguistic barriers and into greater Europe through letters to the Avignon papal court; Charles V, King of France and his brother Louis, Duke of Anjou; Louis the Great and Elizabeth of Hungary. The heatmap of Catherine’s recipients (Fig. 1), which takes into account the known locations of letter recipients (308 of the total), shows how Catherine’s output radiates from Siena, reaches to the north and to the south, and trickles into Europe. This is also reflective of some of the travels that Catherine made during her lifetime, throughout Tuscany, to Avignon and to Rome. The spread of her letters does not speak only to geographical diversity, but to linguistic variety as well. Italian, a relatively new vernacular language, was even more formally varied at the time of Catherine’s writing than it is in contemporary dialects today, as the language developed and clustered throughout what would become Italy. Catherine’s recipients within Italy did not consist solely of native Italian speakers, as she wrote to the Englishmen William Fleet and John Hawkwood while both in Italy, the French-born Pope Gregory XI in his travel to and settlement in Rome, and many of her bilingually educated male correspondents may have been more accustomed to writing in Latin rather than Italian, especially as a lingua franca. 
  

Fig. 1, interactive online version: http://bit.ly/CatherineLetterMap 


Catherine’s adeptness at cultivating her network probably began with her decision to join the mantellate at about 18 years old, as it was a tertiary group that allowed her access to the Dominican Order and also provided her with relative autonomy as a lay practitioner. While in Pisa in 1375 on a diplomatic mission working to sway Pisa and Lucca in favor of the papacy, Catherine began to write letters frequently and in a manner that would continue to be developed throughout her letter writing career which persisted for the rest of her life. F. Thomas Luongo notes (Saintly Politics, 81),
Catherine’s letters from Pisa reveal an increasingly intense preoccupation with the dispute and its threat to church unity, and develop what was to become a familiar theme in her letters to secular and clerical leaders: a three-pronged program for peace in Italy and the church, consisting of the interdependent goals of Crusade, return of the pope to Rome, and ecclesiastical reform.
What is particularly noteworthy about Catherine’s letters, is that they present to us a literate community of women from the 14th century, material echoes of exchange between mantellate and other women who wrote letters to each other in absence, or to offer advice and spiritual guidance. Of her letters that survive, one-third of them were written to women, proving the significance of her relationships with women, as well as her esteem of them, as she chooses to not only address the pope, political leaders and her confessors in her letters, but the women belonging to her order as well as those from different classes. The female community she belonged to was also significant in the propagation of her letters, as they were her first scribes. The dispersal of Catherine’s letters therefore establishes a group of women capable of reading and writing in the vernacular and, though this was not considered to be literacy in a Latinate world, reveals the community-based education attained by these individuals. 
More than negotiating the various intricacies of a classed society, the letters Catherine wrote also straddled the public and private realms of her cultural context; Catherine wrote on both political and spiritual matters, often to public figures, but did so in the intimate medium of the personal letter. Letters to the Pope, Catherine must have known, would not have been read solely by him, and indeed the personal letters arrived with a public performance, as Raymond sent an accompanying messenger to Pope Gregory XI in order to interpret, viva voce, Catherine’s Italian words into Latin (Tylus 161). Her letters were also often written in a communal manner with fellow Mantellate nearby and serving as her scribes, as in T204 addressed to Bartolomeo Dominici, which shows community and jocularity at once: “Dice Alessia grassotta, che voi preghiate Dio per lei e per me, e per Cecca perditrice di tempo.”[3] Catherine’s acts of mediation are further embodied by the language registers she employs in the texts of the letters themselves. F. Thomas Luongo observes that Catherine (74) 
mixes elements of high formality (for example, the superpapal self-identification as “servant and slave of the servants of Jesus Christ”) with a chatty style typical of a personal letter (for instance, the informal and simple closing, “I won’t say more,” a typical element of Tuscan secular and mercantile letters). The tone of Catherine’s letters is not popular or colloquial, but frequently strikes a lofty and prophetic register; nevertheless, consistent with the style of the personal letter, the language is her own Sienese vernacular, immediate and familiar, a “low” form of language. 
Through mixing registers between her opening and closing statements, Catherine shows her relative ease with negotiating a more learned rhetorical approach indicative of a public document with the features of a textual conversation between friends. Catherine mixes her serious religious guidance with “small shreds of gossip and conversation,” as Jane Tylus notes (33).[4] Catherine works to blends orality of chattiness with a strict and consistent formality that is in keeping with her spiritual mission. 
        The vast majority of Catherine’s letters follow a strict formal opening that adhere to the literary genre of the letter, and closely follow the example of papal letters. While rhetorically positioning herself as a humble servant in a rhetorical move on which to base her persuasion, Catherine then continues on to convey to her correspondant what she wants for them to do. The introductory sentences of letter T236 to the nobleman Bartolo Usimbardi, for instance, exemplifies Catherine’s practice:
Al nome di Gesù Cristo crocifisso e di Maria dolce. Carissimo figliuolo in Cristo dolce Gesù. Io Catarina, serva e schiava de’ servi di Gesù Cristo, scrivo a voi nel prezioso sangue suo; con desiderio di vedervi ardere nella fornace della divina Carità …”[5]
Breaking this format down, the formal openings to all her letters almost always follow this formula: 
1. Invoking Christ and Mary 
2. Referring to the addressee as her dearest son or daughter in Christ 
3. Self-referencing as the servant and slave of Christ
4. Stating that she writes to the recipient in the precious blood of Christ 
5. Stating what she desires to see the addressee do. 
This trajectory enables Catherine to create hierarchies that tie both herself and the addressee to Christ and the Virgin, while also positioning herself in the dual role as both a mother to the addressee and a slave of Christ. Evoking the blood of Christ as her ink connects her letters to the common literary trope of the Middle Ages while also connoting the precious nature of her missile. By setting up these relational values, Catherine’s request to her recipient is justified and even expected; it is as though Catherine is submitting a resume showing her qualifications prior to making demands. This careful positioning, along with her ability to comfortably write in very formal and very candid registers appropriate to each addressee reveals Catherine’s adeptness at negotiation.
        Though her letters are offered as personalized correspondence typically tailored to an individual, they also provide a general spiritual value to her direct followers and even future Christians. Catherine was aware that her letters to the Pope were being read to him aloud, likely before a larger audience of his counselors and others. Moreover, she would know that items in the Pope’s possession would enjoy a life beyond that of its owner, being of interest not just to those of his own time, but to those in the future. She knew that her letters, like other spiritual texts, that circulated through churches would have been saved in church registries, especially as her reputation grew. Even in her own capacity, Catherine would sometimes tell her recipients, or messenger-scribes to share the letters with others by passing them along or reading them aloud, so that a wider audience would be able to benefit from them (Tylus 190, 201). Indeed, the major themes of her letters were often general enough to be applicable to many. As Karen Scott notes, Catherine’s letters often discuss a “main virtue which she wishes her correspondents to understand and practice better…” demonstrating that her letters can be situated in a wider spiritual discourse applicable to many (100). Her request to preserve not just her Dialogo but her “other writings” as well affirms that Catherine is aware of the textual legacy of her letters and believes that the work will continue to serve God by reaching living people.


Financial Language in the Letters


        Catherine’s letters prove to be quite pragmatic and aware of her readership, providing worldly language, and monetary language in particular, as a means to drive home spiritual teachings. Though one may expect monetary analogies to be most effective with a lay and noble audience, Catherine also employs economic metaphors when writing letters addressed to religious recipients. As Catherine and her contemporaries were living during a time when the mercantile class was flourishing, trade was increasing, and written language was becoming more accessible to the general population (i.e., the rise of the vernacular in Europe), commercial and monetary concerns touched a greater portion of society. This blending of the spiritual and the earthly shows a careful negotiation of mixed signs that can at times seem contradictory, especially as Catherine’s teachings encourage poverty. The letters to nobles in particular must achieve a prudent balance in an effort to be complimentary to those who are likely providing some financial or political support to herself, and theological teachings that favor poverty over riches. 
  

In 39 letters, 15 of which were written to women, Catherine uses the economic metaphor of “l’arra,”[6] a word that Catherine also uses in the Dialogo[7] and which Suzanne Noffke explains “has the sense of a down payment, a pledge of future payment in full” (The Dialogue, 68). The 1612 edition of the Vocabolario dell’Accademia della Crusca (Venezia) provides the following definition for the word arra: “propriamente parte di pagamento della mercatantia pattuita, che si da al creditore per sicurtà, laquale, in caso, la mercatantia non si volesse, si perde.”[8] The word therefore has a sense of a deposit, a payment installment, or a guarantee that the item will be paid in full at a future point in time. In her letters, Catherine uses the phrases “l’arra d’inferno” (“down payment on hell”) and “l’arra di vita eterna,” (“down payment on the eternal life”) most frequently, with just “l’arra” used twice and “l’arra della morte eternale” used once to Raymond.[9] In the chart above, we can see that she uses the phrase “l’arra di vita eterna” most often for male religious, and more so for men than for women throughout each class (religious, noble, and lay), respectively. Women were far more likely to receive the phrase “l’arra d’inferno,” except for in the case of female religious. Catherine is therefore much more likely to tell women that they are making a down payment on hell while telling men that they are making a down payment on the eternal life in paradise. 
Striking a parallel between financial language and spiritual matters is not original, but Catherine uses this analogy frequently. The Latin Vulgate version (the one Catherine would have been familiar with) of the Epistle to the Ephesians (the tenth book of the New Testament) includes the passage “qui est pignus hereditatis nostrae in redemptionem adquisitionis in laudem gloriae ipsius” (Ephesians 1:14).[10] Both “pignus” and “adquisitionis” have economic connotations, with “pignus” referring to a pledge (or security for debt) or a mortgage, and “adquisitionis” referring to an acquisition.[11] Following the canonical text of the Bible ensures that Catherine is not using language that is far removed from tradition, which could serve to protect her as a woman writing about spiritual matters. As neither of the Latin words used in Ephesians are a cognate for “arra,” it is worth noting that Dante does use this word in Purgatorio: “Lo sommo Ben, che solo esso a sé piace, / fé l’uom buono e a bene, e questo loco / diede per arr’ a lui d’etterna pace” (28, 91-93, emphasis mine).[12] Dante uses this language in the passage narrated by Matilda in the earthly paradise, where she gives the historical context of Eden and explains that “the high Good” paid a down payment to man for eternal peace. Even predating Dante, is the work of female mystic Angela da Foligno, whose Latin text, often referred to as her “Libro” (as with Catherine’s Dialogo), also uses the word “arra:” 
Studeamus igitur sustinere tribulationes temporales cum patientia, immo & cum gaudio. In eis enim signum recipimus, quod sumus dilecti & electi ab amato, & recipimus arram suae haereditatis (Angela da Foligno, Angela de Fulginio 390, emphasis mine).[13] 
Angela is directly referring to the Epistle to the Ephesians, which may indicate that in oral language people were substituting the word “arra” for “pignus” in 13th- and 14th-century Italy. Even if this were not the case, the use of the common word of “arra” suggests again that there is an exchange between mystical and poetic writing, as writers in both genres are using this specific financial word to write about spirituality. 
In one of Catherine’s letters to Don Giovanni dalle Celle, a Vallombrosan whom she met at his hermitage outside Florence in 1374, she explains that those who are full of love for God taste the down payment they make on the eternal life, while those who direct love to themselves taste the deposit they make on hell (T322):
Non gli è duro il portare pena nè fadiga; anco gli è diletto, perchè con odio santo ha abbandonato sè medesimo, onde riluce in lui la virtù della pazienza, con le sue sorelle, cioè fortezza e longa perseveranzia. Questi gusta l’arra di vita eterna: siccome quegli che stanno nell'amore proprio,gustano l’arra dell'inferno; perchè sono fatti incomportabili a loro medesimi, amando disordinatamente sè e le creature e le cose create.[14]
The letter, believed to be dated shortly after December 13, 1378, is the second letter she has addressed to Don Giovanni dalle Celle, and in it, she encourages him to follow through to be present at the council of the servants of God that Urban VI had invited him to join in Rome. The letter deals with the theme of charity, which she refers to as a “dolce madre” (“sweet mother”), and she explains that she is sure that if his love were to be consumed in the oven of divine charity he will certainly leave behind his selfish love, but she constructs her letter to suggest that his responding positively to the invitation from the pope is a kind of test of this love:
Or m’avvedrò se voi sarete amatori di Dio e della reformazione di santa Chiesa, e se voi non ragguarderete alle proprie consolazioni. Son certa che, se voi averete consumato l'amore proprio in questa fornace, voi non curerete d’abbandonare la cella e le vostre consolazioni; ma piglierete la cella del cognoscimento di voi, e con essa verrete a ponere la vita, se bisognerà, per la verità dolce. Altrimenti, no. E però vi dissi ch’io desideravo di vedere consumato ogni amore proprio di voi nella fornace della divina carità.[15]
As one of her “staunchest defenders,” Don Giovanni dalle Celle was likely living a life consistent with what Catherine describes as being a lover of God, but in this letter she is setting out to ensure that he will dedicate himself to reform the Church (Noffke, Letters Vol. IV, 35). By setting up the financial dichotomy between those who direct their love towards God in the act of divine charity, and those who direct their love inwards towards selfish comforts, Catherine is able to emphasize that these choices serve as deposits on the eternal life.
        In a series of letters Catherine uses variations on the theme of the down payment, which seems to be indicative of the spiritual growth of the addressee. Serving as a patron and disciple to Catherine, Ristoro di Piero Canigiani was a learned lawyer as well as a leading Guelf in Florence. The son of Piero Canigiani and older brother of Barduccio, he acted in a political capacity on behalf of Florence in dealings with Queen Giovanna of Naples and Gregory XI. Catherine first writes to support him through the Revolt of the Ciompi, a rebellion of unrepresented laborers that began in Florence in 1378. The houses of prominent Guelfs — considered to be enemies of the people — were looted and burned around June 22, 1378, and his house and his father’s were among those that were damaged. His father was also exiled from the city. Catherine does not explicitly mention these events in her first letter to Ristoro, T299, but mentions a tragic event in his life, causing Noffke to date this to July 1378 (Letters III, 160). In this letter, she discusses how loving material goods is problematic, because those are only loaned to us, and we will be parted with those goods either during life (when God wills it), or when we die. If people love with sensual love, and with love of the world and its pleasures, people make down payments on hell, as she mentions twice in this single letter:
 Questo è quello miserabile amore che tolle il lume della ragione, e non lassa cognoscere la verità; tolle la vita della Grazia, e dacci la morte; tolleci la libertà, e facciservi e schiavi del peccato, che è quella cosa che non è: onde in questa vita gusta l’arra dell’inferno.[16]


Egli è fatto incomportabile a sè medesimo: onde gusta l’arra dell’inferno; però che il vermine della coscienzia sempre rode. [17]
What is significant in these instances is that Catherine contextualizes the love of money and possessions with the idea of a down payment, striking a very apt parallel that can prove to be effective for those in the noble class, especially at a time when those in Florence are suffering from having lost many of their earthly possessions. Catherine’s letter continues to explain that the love of God, which can be manifested in acts of charity, is a love that cannot be taken away as sensual love can. She writes, “E però questi cotali di neuna cosa possono avere pena, perocchè hanno posto l’amore e l’affetto in quella cosa che non gli può essere tolta,”[18] insisting that those who order their lives around God — acting with integrity in marriage, raising children to love God, and doing works of charity — will suffer no pain because love and affection cannot be taken away from them.
        Based on the next letter addressed to him (T258), it is clear that Catherine had received a letter from Ristoro in which he described his commitment to reforming his life. She responded some time prior to August 10, “when the lifting of the interdict was publicly proclaimed in Florence” (Noffle Letters III 170). In this letter, Catherine discusses her happiness to see his “santo desiderio” (“holy desire”), explaining that his effort to forgive those who had wronged him will ensure that he lives in grace and peace. Those who live in hatred, however, “è privato di Dio, e sta in stato di dannazione; e in questa vita gusta l’arra dell’inferno: perocchè sempre si rode in sè medesimo, e appetisce vendetta, e sta sempre con timore.”[19] Again, there is the worldly image of making a deposit on the infernal afterlife through hatred, revenge, and fear. As the analogy had worked effectively in letter T299, Catherine uses it again, urging the noble Ristoro to continue to redirect his devotion to temporal possessions towards God instead. Catherine’s letter moves on to advise him to unburden his conscience of whatever he thinks is weighing it down, offering him concrete actionable tasks that she enumerates for his benefit. The fourth item that Catherine advises Ristoro on is his marriage:
Aggiungoci una cosa: che nello stato del matrimonio voi stiate con timore di Dio, e con riverenzia v’andiate come a sacramento, e non con disordinato desiderio. E i dì che sono comandati dalla santa Chiesa, abbiate in debita riverenzia, siccome uomo ragionevole, e non come animale bruto. Allora di voi e di lei, siccome arbori buoni, producerete buoni frutti.[20]
Despite her lack of earthly experience in the domain of human marriage, Catherine is able to offer advice on best practices, revealing her adeptness at being aware of her audience and constructing spiritual paths that are attainable across personal circumstances.
        In T301, her last letter to Ristoro, which Noffke dates later than T279 to mid-November 1378, Catherine implies that the recipient and his wife are earnestly considering the abstinence she had recommended in previous letters (Letters, Vol. III, 332). Catherine is very happy for his commitment to spiritual love, and as she wants to see him continue to grow in “il lume e la virtù” (“light and virtue”), she tells him to focus on a few things. Again, these are very task-oriented, providing Ristoro with particular actions to carry out. As part of contextualizing the list as well as encouraging him to follow a virtuous path, she writes, “La virtù gli è tanto piacevole, che dell’uomo virtuoso egli ne fa un altro sè per affetto dolce d’amore; e in questa vita gli fa gustare l’arra di vita eterna: che stando nel mare tempestoso delle molte fadighe e amaritudini, gusta la pace e la dolcezza.”[21] In this letter there is a shift from a down payment on hell to a deposit or a pledge of eternal life. Catherine’s letters to Ristoro reveal a trajectory towards spiritual growth including some kind of virtuous spiritual attainment through Catherine’s financial knowledge that moves the recipient as paying down for a place in Hell to securing a position in Paradise instead. However, rather than Ristoro pledging money on eternal life, it seems more likely in this context that in return for virtuosity, God is offering a backed pledge on the eternal life to Ristoro, such that he can taste peace and sweetness during his time on Earth through doing good in the world. 
        Indeed, people on Earth are not the only ones engaging in financial exchanges, as Catherine explicitly discusses Christ’s making a financial pledge to his followers in a letter to the Queen of Naples, Giovanna d’Angiò (T143). By adding the verb “pagare” (“to pay”) alongside “l’arra,” Catherine makes the monetary image even more explicit. She writes:
O dolcissimo amore Gesù, in segno che tu l’avevi presa per sposa, in capo degli otto dì tu le donasti l’anello della dolcissima e santissima mano tua, nel tempo della santa Circoncisione. Così sapete voi, venerabile madre mia, che in capo degli otto dì, se silevò tanta carne quanta è un cerchio d'anello, e cominciò a pagarci l’arra, per darci pienamente speranza del pagamento, il quale ricevemmo in su ‘l legno della santissima croce, quando questo sposo, Agnello immacolato, fu svenato, e da ogni parte versò abbondanzia di sangue col quale lavò le immondizie e peccati della sposa sua, cioè l’umana generazione.[22]
Catherine’s imagery of Christ’s circumcision is unique to her, though Dupré Theseider suggests that there may be a basis for it in Exodus 4, 25-26 (n. 4).[23] In comparing Christ’s foreskin to a ring, she is giving it earthly value. In other letters in which she describes Christ’s foreskin to a ring given to his followers, she provides additional details in abstentia for the ring: it is neither gold nor silver.[24] Christ’s foreskin being implicitly likened to precious metals provides added financial value to the ring, yet Catherine emphasizes that the foreskin is worth so much more, as it is made of Christ’s flesh and indicative of his first pain, that it is even better than a monetary pledge of the crucifixion to come. As Caroline Walker Bynum notes, “But Catherine herself, in letter after letter, says we do not marry Christ with gold or silver but with the ring of Christ’s foreskin, given in the Circumcision and accompanied by pain and the shedding of blood … shed for the sake of the world” (Holy Feast, Holy Fast 175). The blood and flesh shed during Christ’s circumcision is a small sacrifice that show Christ’s commitment to his followers, and is the first payment he makes to them. Eventually, he pays for all of their sins in full through his crucifixion, inviting them all to the wedding feast that they will find in Paradise.
        The imagery of the wedding is canonical in Christian writing, but it brings with it additional layers of earthly and financial imagery. Following the excerpt quoted above in T143 to Giovannad’Angiò, the letter continues:
E attendete, che il fuoco della divina Carità ci ha donato l’anello non d’oro, ma della purissima carne sua; e hacci fatte le nozze, questo dolcissimo Padre, non di carne d’animale, ma del prezioso corpo suo: ed è questo cibo e Agnello arrostito al fuoco della Carità in su il legno della dolce croce. Adunque io vi prego dolcissimamente in Cristo Gesù, che il cuore e l’anima con ogni suo affetto e movimento e sollecitudine si levi ad amare e a servire sì dolce e caropadre e sposo quanto è Dio, somma e eterna Verità, quale ci amò veramente, e senza essere amato.[25]
As in other letters, the ring here is described as being more valuable than gold, and the feast of the wedding is a feast on the body of Christ. The flame that cooks the flesh is the fire of caritas, and the wood on which it is cooked is that of the cross. All of the material goods of the wedding are brought by God, including the ring and the banquet, and love is paid to the followers of God with no expectation of reciprocation, though Catherine urges followers to love and serve. Paying for a wedding, and paying a dowry (though Christ is typically depicted as the bridegroom rather than the bride), are all financial circumstances that Catherine’s contemporaries would have understood. They would also understand faithfulness as an integral component of marriage, which Catherine goes onto describe later in the letter: “prima che romper la fede allo Sposo eterno suo.”[26] Catherine’s letters explain to their recipients that Christ makes a down payment with his circumcision and a full payment with his crucifixion to ensure that his followers can live an eternal life, but it is necessary that his followers do not counter this payment with their own payments on hell instead.
        As Christ has made a full payment on the eternal life for the sake of his followers, all are indebted to him. To capture the significance of what Christians owe to God, Catherine uses the language of being in debt, and of sinners as being debtors (and indeed, all humans are sinners to some degree). This symbolism is used in chapter 25 of her Dialogo, where she asks why he is so merciful: “Chi ti muove a fare tanta misericordia? L’amore; non il debito o il bisogno che tu abbia di noi, poiché noi siamo rei e malvagi debitori” (emphasis mine).[27] The answer that it is love that compels God to be so merciful to his followers, as he has no real need of the wicked debtors. Catherine uses the word “debito” in 101 of her letters, about 26% of her extant letters. Indebtedness, and its intersections with broader economic language, is an important aspect of Catherine’s spirituality, and throughout her corpus of letters, she uses the symbolism in a different manner.  To exemplify her varied approaches, we will consider three letters in particular, one to Niccolò Soderini, one to an unnamed homosexual, and one to the Defenders of the People and the City of Florence. 
        Noffke dates letter T171 to late February 1376, when Niccolò di Ruggero (Geri) Soderini was one of the priori delle Arti in Florence (Noffke, Letters, Vol. II, 22). It is likely that Soderini had become Catherine’s friend and disciple during her 1374 stay in Florence, and we have three letters in total written to him (T131 was dated earlier, and T247 later). In addition to focusing on the idea of indebtedness, this letter also takes up the words “legare” (to bind), “lega” (league), and “legame” (bond), suggestive of Florence’s intention to join the antipapal league which was not formalized until July 24th of that year. Throughout this letter, Catherine makes use of several themes and word plays, showing her ability to imbue her letters with complicated and intertwined messages. In this letter, the language around indebtedness likens the relationship between Christians and God to the relationship between a son and his father. The son is forever indebted to his father for having been made of his flesh, and for having been given this flesh without having asked. She writes:
O non può mai offenderlo (né debbe offendere) che non sia in pericolo di morte, e in stato di dannazione. Egli è sempre debitore a lui, per l’essere che gli ha dato: e non pregò mai il figliuolo il padre, che gli desse della sustanzia della carne sua; nondimeno il padre, mosso per l’amore ch'egli ha al figliuolo prima ch’egli abbia l’essere, gliel dà. Oh quanto maggiormente noi ignoranti ingrati sconoscenti figliuoli possiamo patire di offendere il nostro vero Padre! Conciossiacosaché ci abbia amati senza essere amato; perocché per amore ci creò e anco ci ricreò a Grazia nel sangue suo … e tutto ci ha dato per grazia, e non per debito.[28]
As the son should never offend the father, Christians should never offend God, indeed it would be considered a worse transgression, and is viewed as pursuing death for having flagrantly gone against the one who granted life. Catherine is also incredibly clear in her analogy, not only does she refer to “vero Padre” in the quote above, but earlier in the letter she also writes, “Adunque con sollicitudine d’andare a dimandare l’adiutorio del Padre, cioè di Dio, conviencelo addimandare.”[29] Other imagery in the letter calls to mind Dante’s schismatics of Canto 28, as she discusses cutting and joining, conflating their schism-inducing behavior of considering to join the antipapal league with the financial trope of being indebt and not making the appropriate payments, as though being in debt cuts one off from the greater whole.
 Letter T21, dated to between February and April 1376, and believed to have been written during Holy Week (April 6-11), is written to a homosexual man, whom she addresses in the formal voi, and whose name has since been scratched out. Noffke notes that the rubric reveals that here is a place where the copyist deliberately removed the name of the recipient, and also omitted “some words unfitting for anyone to know,” which Noffke posits to be “something Catherine regarded as even worse than homosexual behavior” (Noffke, Letters, Vol. II, 144). Using similar language to the down payment, but instead constructing it as a debt, she uses variations of the word debito 11 times throughout this 1,400-word letter. In the first few lines alone she writes the word five times (emphasis mine):
...scrivo a voi nel prezioso sangue suo; con desiderio di vedervi debitore reale, che rendiate il debito vostro al vostro Creatore. Sapete che siamo tutti debitori a Dio... Non pregammo mai che ci creasse: mosso dunque dal fuoco dell’amore; creocci all’immagine e similitudine sua.... Questo è il debito che noi abbiamo tratto da Dio: e questo debito vuole che gli sia renduto: cioè amore per amore.[30]
As in the letter cited above, here Catherine again discusses the debt that must be repaid as love for God, as humanity is created in God’s image due to his being moved by the fire of love. As a debtor, the recipient is constructed as an ignorant thief — “O ladro ignorante debitore”[31] — who steals from his creator. Significantly, both in this phrase and in the phrase “debitore reale” at the start of the letter, Catherine calls this man a debtor outright, though in other letters she refers to all Christians as debtors. Because of her perceived gravity of his sin, Catherine believes herself to be justified in being more direct and does not speak in analogies. 
As the letter continues Catherine writes that we all shall pay our debts, but if the debt is not properly repaid, her addressee will suffer the consequences: “renderemo il debito che dobbiamo rendere a Dio. Sappiate che se voi nol rendeste, voi cadereste nella più scura prigione che si possa immaginare”[32] (T21). This man must confess and hold his sin in contempt to return his debt or he will fall into the darkest prison imaginable (i.e. Hell). Of course, this is not entirely without reference to a Scriptural basis, as she echoes Mark 12:17 when she tells the homosexual to give to God what is his and to the earth what is the earth’s (give to Caesar what is Caesar’s), but her choice of words and repetition shows her position as a public and rhetorical figure working to persuade others. As Cheryl Forbes notes, “Catherine’s images here … are earthly, not heavenly; they are concrete, not abstract” (135). Using language that conjures the economic realm, Catherine is able to appeal to her contemporaries in words that they can easily relate to as metaphors for what is at stake in their spiritual lives.
        Letter T311 differs from the previous two in that it is more explicitly political, addressed to the Sienese government writ large (“A’ signori difensori del popolo e comune di Siena”[33]). Believed to be written some time between October and mid-November 1379, this letter does not shy away from the language of indebtedness, employing variations of the word 12 times in a 1,460-word letter, but the use of the word “debitori” (“debtors”) is more tempered here. Unlike in T21, Catherine does not directly call the signori this word as such, instead explaining that “we” are debtors: “A cui siamo noi debitori?”[34] She explains that we are debtors to God, Church, our neighbors, and ourselves. In the second instance of the word “debitori,” it appears as an analogy: “come ladri a malvagi debitori, tollendo l’altrui con molta ingiustizia.”[35] Whereas the homosexual in the letter above is referred to as a thieving debtor outright, the political leaders of Siena are only compared to thieving debtors. This discussion of indebtedness touches on similar themes of the other letters, and ends with a call to action, as do many of her letters and as discussed above with regards to her letters to Ristoro. She appeals to the Defenders to repay what they owe to God and to give Christ deeds rather than words:
Adunque, vedete che per ogni modo sete tenuti e obligati di rendere il debito alla santa Chiesa e al padre vostro … Pregovi per l’amore di Cristo crocifisso, che voi non diate più parole a Cristo in terra; ma dategli de’ fatti, erendetegli di quello che egli ha dato voi.[36]
Catherine wants the Sienese to remember that they are obligated to pay gratitude (their debts) to Urban VI for his having lifted Gregory XI’s interdict that prohibited Florence and allied cities from participating in public worship and receiving sacraments, and also to recall that Urban VI is the legitimate Pope. 
If the Sienese are successful in repaying their debts in the actions she details, Catherine explains that they will be rewarded not just in the afterlife but on Earth as well. By the end of the letter, she becomes quite specific to her point, explaining how their good deeds can help them recover the port of Talamone from the Pisans through the mediation of the Pope that she will help to orchestrate.[37] Thus, even though Catherine generally constructs indebtedness as loving oneself over God, and favoring time on Earth over concern about the eternal soul, Catherine makes allowances. Understanding the political gains that could be enjoyed through Siena working to legitimize Pope Urban VI against the antipope, Catherine promises earthly power to the government in the form of their regaining access to a port hold at Talamone. Though Catherine can afford to be more spiritually minded in her interactions with individuals, even when incorporating worldly financial language, she must be pragmatic in her political dealings for what she must have perceived to be the greater good of the Church and the faith.
        Because many of Catherine’s interlocutors have the earthly power and financial backing to help her spiritual causes, she must often tread carefully in her letters to them. Though she may say to Madonna Jacoma, the widow of the Lord of Fuligno, that “Elle danno, dico, molestia e scandalo le cose del mondo a chi le possiede fuori di Dio,”[38] her advice is generalized, and can be shifted depending on what she hopes to achieve (T264). Sometimes, she grants that God does give us enjoyable belongings and feelings on Earth, but that these pleasures are intended to serve a greater good, as she notes in a letter to Monna Stricca, the wife of Cione di Sandro Salimbeni (T110):
Onde la ricchezza ci permette, perchè ne siamo disponsatori a’ poveri; le delizie e stati del mondo, non perchè noi leviamo il capo per la superbia: anco, molto maggiormente ci dobbiamo umiliare con un santo ringraziamento della divina bontà.[39]
Riches are permitted, but they should be redistributed to the poor; prosperity should remind us to be thankful to God. This is to say that the meditation on wealth, objects, and opportunities should be directed towards God and the eternal soul rather than to the earthly possessions or temporal states themselves; when one is presented with favorable fortune, they should ask themselves how they can do good works and serve God with it.
Unlike what is recounted in Matthew 19:24, that “it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God,” Catherine — with her mercantile background and desire to see political stability between Europe and the Church — accepts that there is a time and a place for wealth and power. Lorenzo del Pino, a nobleman from Bologna and a doctor and lecturer in ecclesiastical law at the university there, had inherited substantial wealth by the time Catherine writes letter T193 to him. While she mentions that “Cristo abbracciò la povertà volontaria,” she attempts to strike a middle ground with Lorenzo, who must be living like the wretches mentioned in the letter who hate truth. She writes:
Le ricchezze e lo stato del mondo, se l’uomo le vuol tenere, il può; e non offende Dio né l’anima sua; ma se egli le lassasse, sarebbe maggior perfezione, però che maggior perfezione è a lassare che a tenere. Ma s’egli non vuole lassare attualmente, debbe lassare e rifiutare col santo desiderio, e non ponere in loro il suo principale affetto, ma solo in Dio; e tenerle per uso a’ suoi bisogni e della sua famigliae come cosa prestata, e non come cosa sua. Facendo così non riceve pena mai d’alcuna cosa creata; perocché la cosa che non si possiede per amore, non si perde mai con dolore.[40]
Riches and status in the world do not offend God or the eternal soul, even though it would be more perfect to let these things go. The important aspect of one’s relationship with that status and money or possessions is to perceive them as the temporal states and objects that they are. Catherine recommends seeing the prestige and riches as that which is lent to the possessor, rather than that which is owned outright by them. This important relationality, the knowledge that “ogni cosa passa,”[41] serves to redirect vices towards virtues that mediate on a power higher than the self, while also allowing Catherine to make use of these temporal states in her work for the Church (T193). 
Though Catherine lived in poverty by choice and did good works for the poor, Catherine had a large network of support that intersected with many of the nobility, and she may not have fully realized all the possible realities of others. Towards the end of a letter to a prostitute of Perugia, she writes: “E se tu mi dicessi: «il non avere di che vivere mi ritrae»; e io ti dico che Dio ti provvederà”[42] (T276). While she states that she hears the prostitute’s brother will support her (the letter was written at the request of one of the woman’s brothers), clearly the woman in question had not previously had this support, so the implied assistance seems tenuous at best. Though economic imagery is particularly fitting for a prostitute addressee, it seems uneven for Catherine to grant to rich patrons the solace that they are not living in sin despite their wealth, while to a prostitute she does not offer much other than empty words relating that “God will provide for you.” To the prostitute as well as to the homosexual in letter T21, Catherine is less tempered and more dogmatic in her condemnation of their particular sins of the flesh, offering them less comfort than she does for those whom are valuable to her. 










Catherine’s use of financial metaphors can make the spiritual more commonplace and quotidian, and perhaps easier for some to understand. As a spiritual woman, Catherine remains outside of city commerce, as she lives more for her future heavenly life than for her current earth-bound one, but her use of monetary language shows her civic-mindedness, as she is employing a tangible financial contract in order to relate spiritual matters to a class of people within an increasingly mercantile society. In utilizing monetary language in letters about spiritual matters, Catherine strikes a careful balance between two often oppositional schools of thought, bringing them to bear on each other in a meaningful way to better teach her readers and remain as a figure embedded within two spheres. Ultimately, this speaks to her positionality as a mystic who is concerned with both this-worldly and other-worldly concerns at once. 


Catherine’s Advice to Women
With one-third of her letters addressed to women — many of whom were fellow mantellate — Catherine is able to take on the role of a spiritual advisor in the manner of a friend, sister, or mother, and able to write in a register that negotiates between the seriousness of the word of God and the playfulness of informal companionship. A series of letters in particular, to Daniella da Orvieto — “vestita dell’abito di Santo Domenico,” a mantellata, who later attained the state of blessedness, but of whom we do not know many historical details — are particularly provocative and show the full register of Catherine’s writing to women. Daniella is the recipient of four very long and intense letters that were written between the fall of 1378 and early 1380. She appears to be viewed as a spiritual equal by Catherine, though perhaps younger, and seems to have been trying to imitate Catherine’s extreme fasting and penance (Noffke 232). Catherine offers advice and guidance to Daniella, as she does to many similar women in terms of health, behavior and voice, but she also presents some contradictory suggestions. As to whether a woman should speak freely, as Catherine did, or resign herself to silence, to Daniella Catherine recommends both. This appeal to both speaking and silence suggests that a female voice must follow a certain paradoxical standard, or may evolve from one approach to the other. Also, though Catherine does tend to emphasize the corporal, with Daniella this is pronounced.  
Her first letter to Daniella is T65, believed to have been dated in September or early October 1378. Focusing on the consecrated life, T65 is very similar to a letter written to William Flete (T64) and a section of the Dialogo on “Truth.”[43] Each of the letters T64 and T65 follow a parallel structure, but the endings of each are unique and the similar content “is used in each letter with quite different intent” (Noffke, Letters vol. III, 232). In T65 to Daniella, Catherine first mercilessly analyzes the dangers of the ascetic life (though she was clearly a practitioner), then rises to the ardent contemplation of divine love. She discusses two points in particular that she wants Daniella to observe: to be absent of judgmental thoughts of fellow humans, and to understand the importance of a life of mortification (a life that Catherine believes they have both been called to). By the end, however, she writes very personally on her own failings at moderation, “Dolgomi io miserabile, che non seguitai mai questa vera dottrina; anco, ho fatto il contrario, e pero mi sento d’essere caduta spesse volte in dispiacere e in giudizio del prossimo”[44] (T65). Catherine divulges her own difficulties in moderating her practice of penance and in judging others’ practices, wrongfully having believed that if they were not as self-punishing as she that they were not worthy of divine light. In this way, the letter offers Catherine herself as a human being who is not always a supreme example of spiritual devotion, allowing a personal register alongside her more general and mystical approach to offering guidance.
Although in many ways Catherine of Siena acted as an extremely public figure, she also be worked to harmonize her life in terms of an outside, public-facing life alongside a meditative life of self-imposed private contemplation. Daniella attempted to live extremely ascetically in a self-imposed cloister, following a more traditional expression of female spirituality. Catherine, too, makes use of this trope, and to some of her letter recipients, she addresses the concept of the “cell of self-knowledge.” For Catherine, this is dualistic in nature as it requires a mental cloistering of the self while going about as a person in the world amid earthly obligations and distractions. In one letter to the Countess Benedetta Salimbeni, this image is particularly lucid. She writes about the planting of the tree of love for God, explaining where it should be planted (T113):
La terra è la vera umiltà … e ‘l luogo, dov’ella è, è’l giardino chiuso del cognoscimento di sè. Dico che è chiuso, perchè l’anima che sta nella cella del cognoscimento di sè medesima, ella è chiusa, e non è aperta, cioè che non si diletta nelle delizie del mondo. …  non spande il cuore suo per confusione nè per tedio di mente…. Anco si serra e si chiude colla compagnia della speranza e col lume della santissima fede.[45]
This description of self-knowledge as an enclosed garden resonates with the idea of the cloister, but is kept inside oneself, rather than the more traditional and opposite approach of keeping oneself within a cloister. The person who has this garden or cell can lock herself up in it, and not take part in worldly delights, though she is part of the world. By cultivating her own self-knowledge, Catherine was able to maintain a private internal refuge for herself to continue her solitary contemplation of God while publicly doing God’s work in the world. By living within this harmony between public and private, Catherine also advises other women to strike this moderate accord that acknowledges spiritual life but directs energy toward the eternal life.
In her second letter to Daniella, Catherine is explicit regarding the degree of moderation that Daniella must seek to balance worldly and spiritual affairs. This epistle, T213, is dated in mid-October 1378. Like Catherine in her teenage years, Daniella opted to remain in a self-imposed cell. She experienced difficulty due to her asceticism, and found herself very sick due to scoring her body to an unhealthy degree. Though Catherine makes clear that it is within normal spiritual bounds for Daniella to discipline her body so that it may be more compliant, she should not do so if she is weak from illness: “Anco, debbe non solamente lassare il digiuno, ma mangi della carne: e se non gli basta una volta il dì, pigline quattro. Se non può stare in terra, stia in sul letto; se non può inginocchioni, stia a sedere e a giacere, se n’ha bisogno.”[46] The implication here — that Daniella should not only give up fasting but eat meat, and eat it several times a day, and that she should repose as needed — indicates that her health is an important aspect of serving God. In this letter it is made clear that she does not expect the same fortitude of others that she expects of herself, and she does not wish others to be in poor health trying to follow her example. When writing to Daniella, we can see a caring and motherly Catherine who offers sound advice to others when they cannot follow the example that she herself puts forth as a mystic who constantly fasts and beats her own body.
The importance of health is central to Catherine’s spirituality, as she acted as a force in the world. Those who have been to Siena today may have noticed the escalators that are located throughout the city in order to accommodate easier passage among the steep hills. Catherine, who did good works in her own city and traveled throughout Italy and to France in the 14th century, relied very much on her good health in order to accomplish her acts of community building, political engagement, and promoting the social good. Therefore it is in keeping with Catherine’s spirituality to encourage Daniella to get better so that she may bring her entire body to bear on the production of charity. In this same letter, she delineates and dismembers the body to explain how the entire corporal being can be utilized for the word of God (T213):
A tutte le membra del corpo dà ordine, acciocché siano modeste e temperate: l’occhio non ragguardi dove egli non debbe, ma dinanzi a sé ponga la Terra, e ‘l Cielo: la lingua fugga il parlare ozioso e vano, e sia ordinata ad annunziare la parola di Dio in salute del prossimo, e confessare i peccati suoi: l’orecchia fugga le parole dilettevoli, lusinghevoli, dissolute, edi detrazione, che gli fussero dette; e attenda a udire la parola di Dio, e il bisogno del prossimo, cioè volontariamente udire la sua necessità. Così la mano nel toccare o nello adoperare, i piei nell’andare; a tutti dà regola. E acciocché per la perversa legge della impugnazione che dà la carne contra lo spirito, non si levi a disordinare questi strumenti, pone la regola al corpo, macerandolo con la vigilia, col digiuno, e con gli altri esercizii, i quali hanno tutti a raffrenare il corpo nostro.[47]
With this letter, which is offered as advice to another, we can infer how Catherine governs her own individual body parts. Though Catherine is loquacious, we must reason that her mouth is tempered to only speak and proclaim the word of God — never talking idly, as her ears must selectively listen, as her eyes must look to the ground or to the heavens, her feet run, and her hand touch and bring things to fruition. For Catherine, the hand and the tongue must work in harmony, which may be informed by traditional Dominican spirituality as it is consistent with the early preacher Humbert who writes that “one should preach not only with his voice, but with all that he is” (Tylus 184). Not only must Catherine bring her voice to bear on sharing the word of God, but she must make use of her body as well.
        The position of the tongue in this letter may be of particular interest, as Catherine recommends neither than a woman speak freely nor that she should resign herself to silence — indeed, she advises that Daniella do both, suggesting that a female voice must follow a certain standard, or may evolve. Though other mantellate were certainly engaged in charitable works in hospitals and involved in lay society, Catherine was certainly the most politically and publicly engaged of her group. Her advice to other mantellate, from letter T40 written in 1377, addressed to “certain of her daughters in Siena,” offers another compromise between conversation and choosing not to socialize: “che questa purità di mente e di corpo non si potrebbe avere con le molte conversazioni delle creature, nè col ponere l’affetto e l'amore nostro in loro nè in cosecreate, fuori della volontà di Dio.”[48] Again, there is this emphasis that the withholding of speech should be done when it is not an act that serves God, and that speech is made acceptable when conversations occur within the realm of charity for God. When the mantellate care for the ill in the hospital, they are to weep or rejoice with those who weep or rejoice: “e godendo con coloro che godono, che sono veri servi di Cristo crocifisso; e sempre dilettarvi della loro conversazione”[49] (T40). Catherine identifies two separate kinds of speech, but interestingly she uses the same word — “conversazione” — in both cases, causing the speech done outside of God’s love and within God’s love to be quite ambiguous. While Catherine can demonstrate that there are two ways to speak, and that women should indeed speak to serve God, women should not speak in all instances.
Letter T213, which is very lengthy within Catherine’s corpus at 3,100 words, focuses more on the body and punishment of the body than it does toward speech acts and the tongue by the end. In this shift, she continues to advise Daniella:
io invito te e me a fare quello che per lo tempo passato io confesso non avere fatto con quella perfezione ch’io debbo. A te non è intervenuto come a me, cioè d’essere stata e essere molto difettuosa, né d’essere andata con larghezza di vita, e non con estrema, per lo mio difetto; ma tu, come persona che hai voluta atterrare la gioventudine del corpo tuo, acciocché non sia ribello all’anima, hai presa la vita estrema per siffatto modo, che pare che esca fuore dell’ordine della discrezione[50]
Paradoxically, Catherine is both esteeming Daniella’s commitment to asceticism as being greater than what she herself was able to achieve, and reprimanding Daniella for going beyond discretion. Catherine confesses that she has not been perfect in her complete humility, and she says this in close proximity to addressing again Daniella’s body, with the description of it being youthful. Employing the noun “gioventudine” rather than the adjective “giovane,” she further emphasizes the idea of youthfulness, and in placing the “tuo” after “corpo,” the reader sees “gioventudine” and “corpo” in close succession. Despite a tone that is becoming more corporeally concerned, there is still the mother’s scolding evident in this letter; the word “estrema” is used positively, but going out of the confines of discretion is unacceptable. Tylus notes that Catherine “cultivated the persona of the ‘mamma’ (perhaps partially to guard against sexual overtones of her relationships with young men her age),” so this wavering between a maternal and more sexualized tone is not limited to Daniella in particular or her female companions general (117).










In order to continue to explore the corporal fascination, it is necessary to skip to the last letter T316, in order to reference back.
Non dormiamo più, destianci dal sonno della negligenzia, mugghiando con umili e continue orazioni sopra il corpo mistico della santa Chiesa, e sopra il vicario di Cristo. Non cessare d’orare per lui, che gli dia lume e fortezza a resistere a’ colpi de’ dimoni incarnati, amatori di loro medesimi, i quali vogliono contaminare la Fede nostra.[51]
In these lines, towards the end of the letter, we are presented with the continued lesson of being humble, and not being negligent, with a focus on the Church’s (a woman’s) body, and then this interesting mention of fleshy demons who are “amatori di loro”.  With this in mind, we can go back to letter 308, to look at the very last paragraph:
Bàguati nel sangue, acciocchè scrupolo veruno non caggia (“caggiare” like “cadere”) mai nella mente tua, nè per timore servile. Ma nascondianci nella caverna del costato di Cristo crocifisso, dove hai trovato l’abondanzia del sangue. In altro modo anderemo in tenebre, e saremo amatori di noi. Considerando me che altro modo non c’era, dissi ch’io desideravo di vederti bagnata e annegata nel sangue di Cristo crocifisso: e così voglio che tu facci. Altro non ti dico. Permani nella santa e dolce dilezione di Dio: abbi fame del suo onore e desiderio. Gesù dolce. Gesù amore.[52]


Catherine of Siena invokes often the bathing and drowning in blood, as it is very significant to her mystic vision, and she uses similar language to the first sentence of this last paragraph in letters to Raymond.  However, in this letter to Daniella, she becomes more graphic.  She discusses the ribcage of Christ — it is Christ’s side and the blood there from that correlates to Catherine’s mystic vision — and, as in Webb’s essay, there is discussion of Catherine and Christ as containers of each other, depending on perspective.  In this instance, though, it is Catherine and Daniella who are hiding themselves in the cave of Christ’s ribs.  Is Catherine hoping to share her mystic qualities with the woman in whom she sees so much of herself?  Entering the darkness, Catherine and Daniella, together, will be lovers of themselves, with language identical to the paragraph discussing devils who are loving themselves.  Self-love, to be sure, but is this the complete extent of which is being described here?  If pure self-love is so spiritual, then why are the demons also engaging in this behavior?  After stating that she would like to see Daniella soaked and drowned in Christ’s blood, Catherine has nothing else to say save for wanting Daniella to have “hunger” for God’s honor and desire.  While she often ends her letters as in the last two sentences here, her closing is not usually so detailed, merely: “Permani nella santa e dolce dilezione di Dio”.[53]  And finally, as also customary, she ends the letter with the often employed “Gesù dolce, Gesù amore”, returning back to her use of the rhetorical structure of letters.
Erotic overtones are not unusual in medieval mystic writers, and, given that women who pursued religious vocations are said to be the wives of Christ, the eroticism directed towards Him seems almost natural.  Boccaccio, though obviously the writer of many bawdy tales, also speaks to nuns with voracious sexual appetites.  Less often do we see such homoeroticism, even if just insinuation, though Heloise in a letter to Abelard did mention similar homosexual intrigue among nuns.  Since we have so few texts from women living lives similar to Catherine, and given a context of eroticism in medieval religious literature, perhaps this current of corporality is merely another transference of orality to textuality.  


In a letter to Monna Agnesa Malavolti and other mantellate, perhaps Catherine’s first letter that survives, Catherine meditates on Saint Agnes of Montepulciano and Mary Magdalen, pointing out the former’s holy humility and the latter’s passionate “drunken” love. It is between this dichotomy of saints — the meek and the fervent — that Catherine advises the women to behave. She writes, “io vi prego e vi comando che voi entriate in questo santissimo mezzo” —“I beg you, I command you: enter into this most holy middle,”[54] or as Tylus interprets it, this “balance between the two saints” (T61, 197). In either case…...Thus, the addressees should learn to follow each of the saints, and by finding a correct equilibrium of neither too humble nor too ardent. The mediation between a quiet charity and an impassioned zeal also elucidates Catherine’s advice regarding speech. That perhaps her fellow mantellate should still the tongue but not too much and to be quite loquacious when speaking God’s will.




The Corpus of Letters and Network Analysis
[need to incorporate the new network visualizations]
Using digital network visualization to analyze Catherine’s output through her extant letters renders some of the trends of her letter-writing career more obvious. Social network analysis investigates social structures, using nodes (people and things) and the ties that connect them to visualize data. In the visualization below (interactive version online), done in the statistical programming language R and the JavaScript D3 library, the nodes are comprised of letter recipients and letters, and the curved lines represent links between and among letters and their respective recipients. The nodes here are rendered as names of the recipients in text, and the letters are referred to by numbers as used in the Noffke edition of the letters. Time is also represented in this visualization, moving clockwise from the top with letter T61 and Agnesa Malavolti and the Mantellate (likely written before the plague of the summer of 1374), and follow through to letter T373 (written to Raymond of Capua on February 15, 1380), the break of which can be seen through the orientation of the text describing those nodes. Note that “Raimondo da Capua” does not appear next to letter T373, this is because recipients appear in chronological order based on the first instance that Catherine writes to them. When hovering over the name of a letter, the recipient(s) and the tie connecting the letter to the recipient(s) is rendered in a red-orange color, making it readily apparent which letters are being written to a single addressee, and which are addressed to a non-collective group. When hovering over the name of a recipient, the relevant letters addressed to him or her are displayed in a violet color, immediately displaying how many letters that recipient received, and whether the letters were clustered throughout Catherine’s letter-writing activity or if they were limited to a particular time period. 
  

http://lisatagliaferri.com/flare.html 
        As the ties connecting letters and recipients will cluster more dramatically to certain recipients, it becomes more obvious who are the most important nodes in Catherine’s written output. Though one would expect Catherine’s confessor, Raymond of Capua, to play a significant role throughout her letter production (and we do have 16 extant letters addressed to him), a lot of activity can be seen with respect to some other recipients: Monna Agnesa[d], wife of the Florentine tailor Francesco di Pipino (and with whom she shares some addressed letters); Bartolomeo Dominici, a Dominican friar, sometimes confessor, travel companion, and who provides a testimony in the Processo Castellano; Neri di Landoccio Pagliaresi, a Sienese nobleman and poet, disciple, scribe, and eventual hermit, who was responsible for the earliest gathering and dissemination of Catherine’s correspondence. Clustering around the times when they served as pope, Gregory XI received 14 extant letters between 1375[e] and 1377, showing the extent of Catherine’s work to bring him back to Rome, with about 70% of the extant letters sent prior to his decision to return to Rome. Pope Urban VI received eight extant letters between 1378 and 1380, revealing a continued literary-based outreach and spirituality on Catherine’s part after her great achievement of convincing Gregory XI to return to Rome. The Queen of Naples, Giovanna d’Angiò, received seven extant letters between late 1374 and 1380, exemplifying Catherine’s political involvement that persisted throughout, and likely drove her letter writing career at least in part. 
        As many of the correspondents with whom Catherine wrote were scribes, translators, writers and orators, collectors of her writing, and attested to her sanctity, Catherine successfully developed a literary network around herself. The community-building nature of Catherine’s outreach and expression of religiosity are evidenced in the archive of letters that we have extant today. Of the nearly 400 letters that remain, 46.2% of the letters were addressed to more than one recipient. That is, for almost half of the letters that Catherine wrote, she intended more than one recipient, whether it was a group of the mantellate, a Sienese political group, or a husband and wife (as with the letters addressed to Francesco di Pipino, a Florentine tailor, and his wife Monna Agnesa). By writing to the plural voi, Catherine is consciously spreading her writing, connecting with many more recipients and getting more value and potential outreach for a single letter. Though there are some instances when she writes similar letters to different recipients (as when she writes to people she does not know well), she is more often writing to recipients who are already connected to each other, tapping into a community that connects through and radiates around her. 
          
Indeed, Catherine works to further develop this community as the majority (73.7%) of her correspondents are the recipients of more than one letter over the course of her letter writing career. The remaining 26.3% of her extant letters are written to recipients who only received one known letter from Catherine, which in many cases is indicative of a one-off requirement of Catherine’s, as when she wrote to a prostitute from Perugia on behalf of the prostitute’s brother (T276). In other cases the recipients may have in fact received more than one letter but they are no longer extant. This is likely the case in letter T151b, which is no longer decipherable beyond the title of “Frate” for its having been overwritten so much. The overwriting is, however, indicative of a continued literary engagement with Catherine’s texts, as people continue to interact with these physical objects that were collected and maintained to testify to Catherine’s spirituality as well as her productive writing career. With all of this in mind, when considering the circular network diagram, it is important to realize that it is Catherine of Siena who is at the center of this network, serving as the connecting force among all of these recipients and letters.
  

Among the people in her community of literary exchange were female friends and disciples including Alessa dei Saracini, Francesca di Clemente Gori (often referred to by her nickname “Cecca”), Giovanna dei Pazzi, and Giovanna di Capo, who also served as her earliest scribes and who are recipients of several of her letters. Alessa dei Saracini, a young woman of a noble family who took the habit of Saint Dominic, served as a travel companion to Catherine and also offered her house in Siena as a place of refuge for her outside of the crowded Benincasa household. As a noblewoman, Alessa was educated at least in the vernacular language, and taught Catherine to read Italian (Noffke, Vision Through A Distant Eye 40). These women, including other female recipients of letters, are indicative of a female literacy throughout Italy and beyond, and also point to a literary network of women in the vernacular language. Though many of these women likely did not read and write in Latin due to their being precluded from masculine discourse, they were still capable at creating this broader community of written discourse and exchange in Italian.
  

        Though women serve as a significant part of her community, they make up about a third of her letter correspondence, with men comprising the bulk of the recipients of her letters. This is likely due to women’s lack of access to education, but also speaks to Catherine’s ability to penetrate the more exclusive masculine religious community of her time, and how she did so through adept written exchange. During a time when the vast majority of Italian spiritual women were considered to be “witches” or otherwise transgressive in some way (King 145[f]), Catherine was able to persuasively and successfully advocate for her authentic mystical experiences and knowledge of God. An instrumental figure in asserting and maintaining Catherine’s reception and legacy was her confessor and advisor from 1374 on, Raymond of Capua (Raimondo della Vigne da Capua). Destined for a legal career and student of law at the University of Bologna, Raymond instead chose to enter into the Dominican Order while still a student in 1350. First assigned to Montepulciano, he served as chaplain to nuns of the Dominican Second Order in the monastery there. Agnes of Montepulciano, a former prioress of this monastery, was highly regarded by the community, and Raymond became her first biographer when he wrote of her life about 50 years after her death. Clearly, as someone educated in law and someone who was writing hagiography even before his encounter with Catherine, Raymond was a person who realized the power of writing. And in fact this writing proved to be fruitful as Agnes was canonized by Pope Benedict XIII in 1726. Raymond was sent next to Rome and then to Siena, where the Master General assigned him to be the spiritual director and confessor to Catherine of Siena, who was already a notable figure by the time Raymond began to work with her, and she in turn helped his career by causing him to be noticed by the pope. Because of his important relationship to her, Raymond received a large amount of letters from Catherine, including letters that describe important turning points in her life, including when she describes learning to write by her own hand (T272), and when she recounts the execution of Perugian Niccolò di Toldo in 1375 (T273). Becoming the Master General of the Dominican Order in the year of Catherine’s death, he worked on the authoritative viva of her life between 1385 and 1395. The result of this work, a hagiographical work that is known as the Legenda maior, would establish itself as the most influential biographical work on Catherine.
Among her male scribes were her disciples Francesco di Messer Vanni Malavolti, Neri di Landoccio Pagliaresi and Stefano di Corrado Maconi. Francesco, who was first a married nobleman then became a Benedictine, received only one extant letter of Catherine’s, also provided testimony for the Processo Castellano[g], a document written compiled in the beginning of the 15th century and instrumental to the canonization of Catherine. Neri, as discussed above, received many of Catherine’s letters, and had served to be an important correspondent for Catherine as he helped to secure her literary legacy through collecting and disseminating a group of her letters. Stefano was also responsible for a collection of Catherine’s letters. A member of the lesser nobility of Siena and a travel companion, like Francesco he also provided one of the 24 testimonies to the Processo Castellano, and entered the Carthusian Order after Catherine’s death. With two scribes among the men who collected Catherine’s letters for posterity, as well as two who beared witness to her saintly acts, it is clear that her scribes greatly respected Catherine’s good works and writing, honoring the latter through maintaining and circulating it.
        Among the other correspondents of hers who provided testimony for the Processo Castellano are Bartolomeo Dominici, a Dominican friar, sometimes confessor and travel companion who received nine extant letters from Catherine; Martino, Abbot of the Vallombrosan monastery of San Michele in Passignano, who received two extant letters; Pietro di Giovanni Ventura, an early disciple who was converted by Catherine to become a Dominican friar and served as Catherine's emissary and also received two extant letters. Tommaso d’Antonio da Siena, also known as Caffarini, was a very important figure in Catherine’s life and her afterlife. Responsible for beginning work on the Processo Castellano through the solicitation of testimonies, and providing a testimony himself, Caffarini also campaigned to seek papal approval of the Dominican mantellate and worked to develop and legitimize the saintly cult around Catherine of Siena (Ferzoco). A native of Siena, devoted follower of Catherine, and the director of the Sienese mantellate in the year of her death, Caffarini proved to be extremely influential in promoting reform within the Dominican order, receiving recognition for the mantellate, cultivating Catherine’s cult and verifying her sanctity (Parsons[h] 16). Together with Raymond of Capua, Caffarini is responsible for much of the hagiographical writing about Catherine in the decades after her death. Creating an abbreviated version of Raymond’s Legenda maior, called the Legenda minor, and he also wrote the much longer Libellus de Supplemento to include additional biographical as well as hagiographical details about Catherine. 
        Cristofano di Gano Guidini, a follower of Catherine’s who did not fully commit to a religious life, choosing instead to marry and have children, served sometimes as a scribe for Catherine, according to Caffarini, and most importantly rendered her Dialogo into Latin (Luongo, Saintly Politics, 136). A Sienese notary who was active in politics, Cristofano was aware of what was required to gain legitimacy through text distribution in contemporary Europe. Though Catherine exercised control over her texts through use of the Sienese vernacular, Cristofano and Raymond — who wrote his Legenda maior in Latin — and more than likely Catherine herself, realized that Latin translation would be necessary to realize true circulation of her writing. Were it not for this Latin translation by the notary Cristofano, who was also a writer of his own autobiography, the Libro di memorie which includes vivid recounts of his relationship with Catherine, the Dialogo likely would not have been later translated into Middle English for the nuns of the Syon Abbey. Though Catherine would always assert that spiritual priorities were more important ones, including in her letters to Cristofano, she likely understood that his political involvement was an important node of her larger network, and his spirituality proved to be more civic in nature, particularly in his devotion to the Spedale della Scala. Indeed, F. Thomas Luongo reads Catherine’s tone in her letters to him not necessarily as reproachful, but suggests that it is only “affectionate mocking of a follower whom she knew to be committed only so far” (137). I believe that it is Cristofano’s “civic piety,” as Luongo calls it, which leads to Cristofano taking action with the translation of Catherine’s book, as he ensures that the educated elite and those with political power can read it and take it seriously.
        Catherine, however, also exerted her own power over the afterlife of her texts, by entrusting her writing into the hands of Giovanni Tantucci, one of her early followers. A priest and scholar, likely educated at Cambridge along with William Flete, Giovanni was convinced by Catherine to “renounce his comfortable worldly life as a priest and dedicate himself to the ascetic life” as early as 1365 (Russell 79). He became part of the Augustinian hermit community of Lecceto, and Catherine probably was provided access to this network through Giovanni, and she would continue to correspond with this network frequently throughout her letter writing career (Jorgensen[i] 146). Because of this long history, and likely because of his scholastic approach to religiosity, she had a great deal of respect for him and she entrusted him with her writings including her letters before her death (Noffke). He absolved her on her deathbed, and also delivered her eulogy. While Caffarini suggests that he was at a loss for words, his taking on the duties of her absolution and funerary oration suggests that he took care of her afterlife in every sense of the word, including of her work. 
In her last letter, written to Raymond, Catherine entrusts the Dialogo in particular to four men; the addressee along with Bartolomeo de’ Dominici, Tommaso della Fonte and the “Master” Giovanni Tantucci (T373[j]):
Anco vi prego che il libro e ogni scrittura la quale trovaste di me, voi e frate Bartolomeo e frate Tomaso e il Maestro, ve le rechiate per le mani; e fatene quello che vedete che sia più onore di Dio, con missere Tomaso insieme: nel quale io trovava alcuna recreazione. Pregovi ancora, che questa famiglia, quanto vi sarà possibile, voi gli siate pastore e governatore, siccome padre, a conservarli in dilezione di carità e in perfetta unione; sicchè non siano nè rimangano sciolte come pecorelle senza pastore. E io credó fare più per loro e per voi dopo la morte mia, che nella vita.[55]
Catherine here anticipates her death and, after an account of her experiences of January 20, 1380, goes on to explain her dying wishes. This letter, explicitly dated February 15, 1380 in three manuscripts, is very likely her last dictated letter, written the same day as T371, which was also written to Raymond, but done in her own hand. What I would like to highlight here is that for Catherine her writing and her greater community are thought about nearly simultaneously — for her, this is her legacy, and she cares about what happens to both her writing and her famiglia. In requesting that several of her followers be responsible for her book and whatever other writing they can find, she ensures that there are several guardians to keep track of her archives. She has found “recreazione” in them, from the Latin “recreare” as in “create again, renew,” which would have been used similarly in Old French. In Middle English, “recreation” was more indicative of “mental or spiritual consolation.”[56] Italian etymology shows that ricreare deals with a sense of “rianimare” alongside rebuilding and restoration, but also with the joy that comes after the strain of rebuilding: “ogni sorta di piacevolezze per distrarre l’animo.”[57] If we think of her writing as a re-creation, it speaks to the reforms that she began to make in the Dominican Order as well as in her special kind of spirituality that engages with the community through good works and writing, and it can also speak to the reflection and the pleasure that can be found after doing this work. Together with her greater network, her famiglia, Catherine is able to spread the commitment to reform as well as the joy that can be found in recreating. 






________________
[1] “[Catherine] had attracted followers, to whom she had communicated her insights in friendship in hundreds of letters, in her prayer as she meditated aloud in their presence, and in the book she had written as a summary of her teaching for them and others like them. She had wanted to preach, and she had preached, even to cardinals and popes. She had influenced common folk and politicians, clergy and hierarchy, by her words and by the power of her life” (Noffke, Vision Through A Distant Eye, 63). 
[2] “There are a number of possible levels at which alterations could have entered into the text of the letters: at the initial dictation, in the making of original or dictation copy for a collection, and finally in any later transcription from collection to collection. But at each of these levels we are dealing with scribes who, as devotees of Catherine, had every reason to be as faithful as possible to the sense of their text if not always to the minor peculiarities of its expression (e.g., orthography and grammar)” (Noffke, Letters, xxiii). 
[3] “Fat Alessa says that you are praying for her and asks you please to keep praying for her. Pray for me too, Cecca the time-waster” (trans. Noffke). 
[4] This is shown in letters such as T204 and others in which the scribes refer to themselves, including Giovanna self-referencing as “Giovanna pazza,” for example (T144, T152,  T208)
[5] “In the name of Jesus Christ crucified and of gentle Mary. Dearest son in Christ gentle Jesus[.] I Caterina, servant and slave of the servants of Jesus Christ, am writing to you in his precious blood. I long to see you on fire in the furnace of divine charity…” (trans. Noffke). 
[6] In modern Italian editions, this word is rendered as “la caparra,” as in the 2006 Edizione Cantagalli.
[7] Chapter 28, “Bene è dunque macto colui che schifa tanto bene, ed elegge innanzi, di gustare in questa vita l’arra de l’inferno, tenendo per la via di sotto, dove va con molte fadighe e senza neuno refrigerio e senza veruno bene; però che per lo peccato loro sonno privati di me che so’ sommo ed etterno Bene” (emphasis mine).
[8] Available via http://vocabolario.sns.it/html/_s_index2.html. 
[9] T65, T322, T76, T359, T39, T331, T244, T83, T124, T241, T216, T64, T85, T301, T340, T335, T44, T38, T151a, T369, T355, T361, T299, T264, T360, T111, T310, T5, T20, T194, T258, T3, T276, T304, T48, T84, T143, T221, T104
[10] Available via https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Ephesians+1%3A14-16&version=VULGATE. “which is the pledge of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of His glory” (https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Ephesians%201:13-15&version=KJ21)
[11] Definitions available via http://latin-dictionary.net/. 
[12] “The Highest Good, whose sole joy is Himself, / made man to be-and to enact-good; He / gave man this place as pledge of endless peace” Trans. Mandelbaum. 
[13] An Italian translation from 1604 reads: “Affatichiamoci di soffrire co[n] patienza le tribolationi té porali, poiche i[n] esse riceviamo il segno, che dall’amato nostro siamo tenuti cari, & riceviamo un’arra dell’heredità del Paradiso” (Trans. Girolamo Giovannini, 123 v, emphasis mine).
[14] Noffke translates “gusta l'arra” as “foretaste” rather than “taste the deposit”: “It’s not hard for them to bear pain and labor; in fact, it’s a joy because they have in holy hatred let go of themselves, and so the virtue of patience shines brightly in them, along with her sister virtues, fortitude and enduring perseverance. They have a foretaste of eternal life, just as those who live in selfish love have a foretaste of hell because they have become unbearable to themselves by loving themselves and other people and created things in a disordered way.”
[15] “Now I shall see whether you are a zealous lover of God and of the reform of holy Church, and whether you are unconcerned about you selfish comforts. I am certain that if you have had your selfish love consumed in this oven you won’t mind leaving your cell and your comforts. Instead you will take to the cell of self-knowledge, and there come to the point of laying down your life, if need be, for sweet Truth. But not otherwise. And this is why I said I long to see all your selfish love consumed in the oven of divine charity” (Trans. Noffke). 
[16] Noffke again translates the two instances in this letter as a “foretaste of hell:” “This is the wretched love that takes away the light of reason and keeps us from knowing the truth. It robs us of the life of grace and gives us death. It deprives us of liberty and makes us servants and slaves of sin, the thing that is not. And so in this life we have a foretaste of hell.”
[17] “We become unbearable to ourselves. We have a foretaste of hell because the worm of conscience gnaws away continually” (Trans. Noffke).
[18] “People who act in this way are pained by nothing, since they have set their love and affection on what cannot be taken away from them” (Trans. Noffke). 
[19] “...have lost God and are living in damnation; even in this life they experience a foretaste of hell. They are constantly eaten up inside, hungry for revenge and in continual fear” (Trans. Noffke).
[20] “I’ll add one thing more. Live in the state of marriage with fear of God; approach it with reverence as a sacrament, and not with uncontrolled desire. Have due respect for the days commanded by holy Church, as a reasonable man, not as a brute animal. Then the two of you, like good trees, will produce good fruit.”
[21] “Virtue … is so pleasing to God that in love’s affection he makes the virtuous person another himself; in this life he lets that person experience eternal life, so that he or she tastes peace and sweetness even on the stormy sea of bitterness and difficulty” (Trans. Noffke). 
[22] “Oh Jesus, gentlest love, as a sign that you had espoused us you gave us the ring of your most holy and tender flesh at the time of your holy circumcision on the eighth day. You know, my revered mother, that on the eighth day just enough flesh was taken from him to make a circlet of a ring. To give us a sure hope of payment in full he began by paying this pledge. And we received the full payment on the wood of the most holy cross, when this Bridgegroom, the spotless Lamb, poured out his blood freely from every member and with it washed away the filth and sin of humankind his spouse” (italicized text Noffke’s). 
[23] “Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me. So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision,” King James, available http://biblehub.com/kjv/exodus/4.htm 
[24] Other letters that have the imagery of the foreskin ring are T221, T50, T261. See also Prayer 25.
[25] “Notice that the fire of divine charity gave us a ring not of gold but of his own purest flesh. This gentlest of fathers celebrated his wedding with us in a feast not of animal flesh but of his own precious body. This food is Lamb, roasted over the fire of charity on the wood of the sweet cross. So I beg you most courteously in Christ Jesus to lift up your heart and soul with all your affection, energy, and caring, to love and serve so gentle and dear a Father and Spouse as God, high eternal Truth, who tenderly loved us without being loved” (Trans. Noffke).
[26] “...we would sooner die than break faith with our eternal Spouse” (Trans. Noffke). 
[27] “What could move you to such mercy? Neither duty nor any need you have of us (we are sinful and wicked debtors!) — but only love!” (Trans. Noffke). 
[28] “No, the son neither can nor should offend his father without courting death and condemnation. He is forever indebted to his father for the existence his father has given him. The son never asked his father to give him a share of his own flesh, and yet he did, moved by the love he had for his son even before he existed. How much less, then, should we foolish heedless ungrateful children be able to bear offending our true Father! For he loved us without being loved. Out of love he created us, and then created us anew to grace in his blood. ... and all this not because it is due us, but by grace.” (Trans. Noffke)
[29] “So you must go — and quickly — to ask for your Fathers (I mean God’s) help.” (Trans. Noffke)
[30] “I long to see you an honorable debtor, paying what you owe your Creator. You know we are all in God’s debt… We never asked to be created. Moved by the fire of love, God created us in his own image and likeness… This is the debt we have incurred with God, and God wants this debt repaid: love for love. (Trans. Noffke, emphasis mine)
[31] “Oh foolish debtor thief!” (Trans. Noffke).
[32] “We shall pay the debt we owe to God. Realize that if you don’t pay it, you will land in the darkest prison you can imagine.”
[33] “To the Defenders of the People and the City of Siena.” (Trans. Noffke)
[34] “To whom are we debtors?” (Trans. mine)
[35] “Like thieves and wicked debtors, we take from others very unjustly.” (Trans. Noffke)
[36] “Therefore, you all see that for each way you are held to and obliged to return the debt to holy Church and your father … I pray to you all, for the love of Christ crucified, don’t continue to say more words about Christ on earth, but give him deeds, return to him that which he has given you.” (Trans. mine)
[37] Though after Siena did reconcile with the papacy and Urban VI offered to return Talamone to Siena, the Pisans refused. Siena did eventually recover the port in February 1379 through the mediation of Cardinal Badoero (Noffke, Letters, Vol. VI, p. 311). 
[38] “The things of the world are stumbling blocks and trouble for those who possess them apart from God.” (Trans. Noffke)
[39] “God permits us to have wealth so that we may be its administrators for the poor. [He gives us] worldly pleasure and prosperity not to make us lift up our heads in pride, but rather than we should humble ourselves all the more in holy thanksgiving for divine goodness.” (Trans. Noffke)
[40] “If you want to have wealth and worldly prestige you can, without offense to God or harm to your soul. Still, it would be more perfect to abandon these things, because is more perfect to let them go than to possess them. If you don’t want to leave them in actuality, then you ought to let them go and renounce them in holy desire by giving you first love not to them but to God alone and by using them according to your own needs and your family’s, as something lent to you and not your own. If you do this you will never suffer harm from any created thing, because we never grieve over the loss of what we have not loved possessively.” (Trans. Noffke)
[41] “all things pass.” (Trans. mine)
[42] “And if you should say to me, ‘Not having anything to live on keeps me from [withdrawing]’ I tell you God will provide for you.” (Trans. Noffke). 
[43] Chapters 98-101.
[44] “Wretch that I am, I regret that I have never followed this true teaching. I have, in fact, done the opposite. And this, I believe, is why I’ve so often fallen into unhappiness and into passing judgment on my neighbors.” (Trans. Noffke)
[45] “The soil is true humility … and the place you’ll find it is the enclosed garden of self-knowledge. I say it is enclosed because if you dwell in the cell of self-knowledge, you are enclosed. You are not wide open, because you are not dissipated in worldly delights. … You don’t let confusion or spiritual vexation dissipate your heart … No, you lock yourself up, in the company of trust and the light of most holy faith…” (Trans. Noffke)
[46] “In that case, in fact, not only should you give up fasting, but you should eat meat — and if once a day isn’t enough, have it four times. If you can’t stand up, stay in bed. If you can’t kneel, remain sitting — or lying down if necessary.” (Trans. Noffke)
[47] “To all the members of the body, that they be modest and temperate: let the eye not look where it should not, but hold before itself earth, and heaven; let the tongue flee idle and vain speech, and be disciplined to announce the word [she uses “parola” and not the usual “il Verbo”, more related to “speech” / “parlare”] of God for the salvation of the neighbor, and to confess its sins: let the ear flee agreeable, flattering, dissolute words, and any words of detraction that might be said to it; and let it hearken for the word of God, and the need of the neighbor, willingly listening to his necessity. So let the hand be swift in touching and bringing realization, and the feet in going: to all, discretion gives a rule. And that the perverse law of the flesh that fights against the spirit may not throw these tools into disorder, it imposes a rule upon the body, mortifying it with vigil, fast, and the other exercises which are all meant to bridle our body.” (Trans. Noffke)
[48] “you cannot have this purity of mind and body if you are having many conversations with other people and setting your love and desire on them or on created things apart from the will of God.” (Trans. mine)
[49] “And you will rejoice with those who are glad because they are true servants of Jesus Christ crucified, always delighting in their conversation.” (Trans. Tylus)
[50] “I summon you and me to do what in past time I confess not to have done with that perfection which I should. It has not happened to you as to me, to have been and to be very faulty, or over-lax and easy-going in my life, instead of strict, through my fault; but you, as one who has wished to subdue the youthfulness of your body that it not be a rebel to the soul, have chosen a life so extremely strict that apparently it is out of all bounds of discretion.” (Trans. mine)
[51] “Let’s not sleep anymore, let us wake from the slumber of negligence, groaning with humble and continual prayers, over the mystical body of the holy Church, and over the Vicar of Christ. Do not cease to pray for him, that Christ may give him light and fortitude to resist the strokes of incarnate demons, lovers of themselves, who want to contaminate our Faith.”
[52] “Bathe yourself in the blood, so that no scruples will ever pervade (fall) into your mind, neither subservient fear.  But let’s hide in the cavern of the ribs of the crucified Christ, where you have found the abundance of blood.  Through other paths we will enter the shadows, and we will be lovers of ourselves.  Considering that there was no other way, I said that I desired to see you soaked and drowned in the blood of the crucified Christ: and this is what I want you to do.  I say nothing else to you.  Persist in the holy and sweet enjoyment of God: have hunger for his honor and desire. Jesus (who is) sweet, Jesus (who is) love.”
[53] “Persist in the holy and sweet enjoyment of God.”
[54] My translation.
[55] “I also ask you and Frate Bartolomeo and Frate Tommaso and the master to take care of the book and any other writing of mine you may find. You, together with Messere Tommaso, do with them whatever you see would be most to God’s honor. I’ve found some recreation in them. Also, as much as you can, please be shepherd and governor to this family, as a father, and keep them in the love of charity and perfect unity so that they may not be left cut loose like little sheep without a shepherd. As for me, I believe I can do more for them in the after my death than I have been able to do during my life.” (Trans. Noffke)
[56] Oxford English Dictionary.
[57] Dizionario etimologico online. http://www.etimo.it/?cmd=id&id=14623&md=1fe8106bb448cfb90e84749a5523d247 
[a]prove these
[b]prove
[c]https://www.amazon.com/Catherine-Siena-Outstanding-Christian-Thinkers/dp/0826476627/ref=sr_1_4?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1467866217&sr=1-4&keywords=catherine+of+siena+cavallini
[d]Need to check letters addressed to Agnesa as there are more than one Agnese
[e]See if you can find the exact date of this letter
[f]I also cite this in Ch 1
[g]https://books.google.com/books?id=8oNeEeDc_gwC&pg=PA240&lpg=PA240&dq=processo+castellano&source=bl&ots=4iPROcQMwe&sig=iGWyEblk3XN1YAjeZUmNehuhIrg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjZpK2Fr_XLAhVC8z4KHYbjAuoQ6AEIIzAB#v=onepage&q=processo%20castellano&f=false
[h]https://books.google.com/books?id=18DBLbQ8kpEC&pg=PA16&lpg=PA16&dq=caffarini+catherine+of+siena&source=bl&ots=PbCGAt-iRe&sig=giPsyJT3aQ6kKD-rp5lRZfU0yH4&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwit4rvJxfXLAhXKPz4KHfMgD-QQ6AEIIzAB#v=onepage&q=caffarini%20catherine%20of%20siena&f=false
[i]https://books.google.com/books?id=jVpNAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA146&dq=giovanni+tantucci&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiR_uajqPbLAhXGSiYKHbyiDdIQ6AEIODAE#v=onepage&q=giovanni%20tantucci&f=false
[j]http://www.ilpalio.siena.it/5/Personaggi/SantaCaterina/Lettere?L=373