Chapter 2. “O amore ineffabile”: The Poetics of Mysticism




  
  

Fig. 1. Word Cloud Visualizations, Catherine’s Dialogo on left, Dante’s Paradiso on right.
Sinclair, Stéfan, Geoffrey Rockwell and the Voyant Tools Team. 2012. Voyant Tools (web application).


The famed love poets Dante and Petrarch are among the most successful 14th-century Italian writers from the perspective of their continued legacy. Their work established the canon of Italian literature, while having also been among the first ventures and earliest innovations of vernacular writing. Though also writing as one of the founders of the Italian literary tradition, Catherine is more often relegated to religious or political rather than literary status (as discussed above). However, she uses language, themes and constructions markedly similar to those of Petrarch and Dante. The primary vernacular texts of each author — Dante’s Commedia, Petrarch’s Rime sparse, and Catherine’s Dialogo — while participating in different communities, appealing to different audiences, and serving various and diverse purposes, also show overlaps of diction, topic, and word frequency. This suggests that the work being done by each of these authors is operating within a particular context, and that there is a certain amount of exchange between these different forms and styles of writing (i.e. mystical and lyrical writing), which is not merely one-directional.
Franco Moretti, in theorizing world literature and arguing against canon-based close reading, makes a case for “distant reading:” “where distance ... is a condition of knowledge: it allows you to focus on units that are much smaller or much larger than the text: devices, themes, tropes — or genres and systems” (49). If we are to recover missing voices from the canon, who have been overlooked due to their marginalized status (be that due to gender, race, religion, economic status, etc.), it becomes imperative to employ new methods of entering into analytical and theoretical discourse. Utilizing a quantitative approach enabled through digital humanities statistical computation can allow readers to look at Catherine’s texts in light of her fellow Italian vernacular innovators that are within the literary canon. 
When applying a digital humanities computational-driven methodology to explore texts, especially those written prior to moveable type that exist in various iterations across manuscript editions, one must bear in mind statistician George E. P. Box’s and Norman R. Draper’s warning: “Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are useful” (424). Applying modes of reading texts — in the humanities writ large or statistical models via digital humanities techniques — is subject to careful analysis, and each method is merely another way of “getting at” a text; not a definitive answer. This is why Moretti’s proposal for “distant reading” can prove useful, as using machines to read texts can provide a wider perspective serving as a counter-balance to close reading. My inquiry into Catherine’s writing brings together computer-based textual analysis and traditional humanistic examination to arrive at a more robust account of her writing and its context. My digital humanities approach uses both statistical word counts and topic models based on a machine learning algorithm trained on a corpus of available 14th-century Italian texts, all of which are visualized so as to be readily accessible. 
It is worth noting that the Dialogo represents the largest corpus by far with 143,906 words, with the Commedia and the Rime sparse containing 101,602 and 57,154 words respectively. Among these three texts, there are 21,549 unique words out of 302,662 words total, that is 7% of the words are unique. The 7% figure shows the vocabulary density of all of these texts, which refers to the measurement of vocabulary usage in comparison to the length of the text, computed by dividing the total words of a text by the total unique words. Of these three corpora, the text with the most vocabulary density is the Commedia, with the Dialogo being the least dense. Dante and Petrarch are much more likely to use variations on the same word in order to fit rhyme schemes and syllabic constraints, and it is up to the analyzer to choose whether or not to render “amore” and “amor” as the same word. In most cases, I chose to have words count differently unless I specify otherwise. These variations of the same word, however, are likely a major computational component of the vocabulary density of their texts. Certain words trend throughout the three texts, with notable peaks in frequency occurring across the corpora: “vero” (peak at the end), “anime” (peak at the end), “cielo” (peak in the middle), “etterna” (peak at the end), “misericordia” (peak at the end). The three texts analyzed together reveal a frequent use of commonly used words throughout them, including “amore,” “lume,” “desiderio,” “dolce,” “occhio/occhi.” When considering Catherine’s Dialogo alone, along with the words above, “anima” and “virtù” are more frequent. The Rime sparse favors words like “bel,” “ben,” “cor” (not combined with “cuore”), “donna,” “morte” and “sol.” The Commedia utilizes words like “ben,” “disse,” “fuor” and “terra” more frequently. As Dante’s Paradiso engages with other-worldly concerns in ways similar to mystical writing, I performed a separate analysis on this canticle (here I changed all instances of “amore” to “amor”), and when compared with the Dialogo, we can see that many words are frequently used across both texts, with “amor”/”amore” and “lume” among the most frequently used words, and other words and categories of words related to Christ, the mind and consciousness, corporeality and nature, and eyesight all being shared across the two texts.
To further see the categories of words and themes that these texts are dealing with, topic modeling analysis was performed across all of the texts mentioned above as well as Catherine’s collection of letters. I used stop word lists of very common words like “un” and “il” so that these would not be counted in the final analysis and throw off the results of meaningful words. For word frequency analysis, the stop word lists included personal pronouns, but I reinstated them for topic modeling as they would no longer overwhelm the sample sizes. Topic modeling is a computational method used to detect the close proximity of words that renders frequent clusters of words called topics, and the full topic modeling analysis of these texts is in the Appendix. Between the Paradiso and the Dialogo in particular, the topic with the most weight shares similar words (in bold), with “amore,” “bene,” “grazia,” “lume,” “dio” and the personal pronouns “mio” / “loro” making up its strongest topic:
 
Paradiso:
mia mio amor occhi ben lui dio luce lume ciel vidi mente lor sol donna beatrice veder lei grazia natura
Dialogo:
loro amore anima virtú veritá lume mio corpo pena bene sangue grazia desiderio decto figliuolo affecto morte sancta dio miei
 
We see that both texts are concerned with love, light, the personal self, goodness, God, and grace. There are some differences between the two sets — “luce,” though similar to “lume” does not occur in the Dialogo topic model, and though “lume” is also concerned with vision, Dante employs “veder,” “vidi,” “occhi” where Catherine does not. There is an interest in the body with Catherine, though not the eyes in particular — preferring the words “corpo,” “sangue” and related words like “pena,” “affecto,” morte.” Instead of seeing, Catherine is more concerned with speech (“decto”). The word “dio” that both Dante and Catherine use, is joined by “figliuolo” in Catherine’s topic model. Additionally, Dante is concerned with the physical space of Paradise, using the words for sky and sun near each other, and he is also concerned with nature and the figure of the woman and Beatrice in particular. Catherine’s proximate words instead show a dualism between the body on one side and the soul on the other, she speaks of desire and virtue and truth while Dante evokes the mind with “mente.” This data suggests that the tradition related to lyrical poetry[1] and mystical writing may well inform each other, and that Catherine’s writing, far from being unlearned, is actively engaging with the larger linguistic world of her time. 


Like mystics who have proven to be master practitioners of shifting subjectivities, the writers of courtly love poetry also negotiate their relative subjectivity and objectivity in relation to their lover. Using amorous and erotic language to do so, they simultaneously contemplate virtue and the loss of self, just as mystic writers do. Though theorists like Beauvoir have argued that mystics, inherently feminine, have been informed by their experience of love and love poetry because they have not been able to function within another domain, here I would like to suggest that there is an exchange — not a one-directional influence — between mystic writing and love poetry. Love poetry generally borrows language from religious writing (the loved lady as the Sun, for example), but is typically thought to eroticize the religious language; and some have argued that the Song of Songs is the solitary gateway for religious and erotic language to mingle together. But mystical writing, while also informed by the Song of Songs, has had a long-standing tradition originating in ancient times (as with the Biblical texts) of erotically-charged language used as a means to access knowledge in general and sacred knowledge in particular. The tradition of love poetry that comes out of courtly love, and of which I will consider Catherine’s fellow Italian vernacular writers, similarly uses erotic language as an avenue to knowledge of love, knowledge of metaphysics (as with Guido Cavalcanti), and knowledge of God.
In the chapter “Vernacular Voices of the Donna: Pisa” in Reclaiming Catherine of Siena, Jane Tylus writes of the significance of the Italian preference for the courtly word donna rather than the more biological femmina for “woman,” which persists to this day. More than biological, the Italian word femmina reveals a somewhat negative connotation, as the 1612 edition of the Vocabolario della Crusca defines the word as “Quell’ animale così ragionevole, come bruto, che concorre col maschio, come recipiente, sesso. L. foeminas.”[2] Castiglione, in his 1528 work Il libro del Cortegiano, uses the word “femine” as a corrollary to “maschi,” when discussing childbirth and biology, but employs the word “donna” much more when discussing the court lady in Book III. Catherine herself makes the distinction between the two words: femmina as weak, donna as cultivating strength and will. Donna, derived from the Latin word domina, is the feminine noun counterpart to Dominus, a word for God. In literal terms, dominus is lord and donna is lady, with all the undertones of King Arthur’s court. As Tylus argues, the word lady is not typically employed more than woman in other languages, for example, the French preferring femme over dame. Though it is interesting that this distinction has been so compelling and influential to the Italian language over time, the use of donna in courtly love poetry reveals the play with subjectivity inherent in these texts. By instilling so much force in the word used for the beloved, granting her a domain and a queendom regardless of her social status — even perhaps suggestive of a feminine god — the masculine lover-speaker mitigates his own power in linguistic terms, often of course significant to the meaning of the poetry.
In terms of feminist analysis, there is a lot to unpack out of troubadour poetry and the subsequent courtly love poetry that developed in the Italian language first in the Sicilian court of Frederick II (the Sicilian School), then through to the Tuscan School and Dante’s own cohort of the dolce stil novo. Though it can be argued that the elevated position of the female beloved in relation to the male pursuer can be seen as progressive, even patronizing, it is also possible to read the texts not as a binary representation of a masculine knight-errant pursuing an inaccessible feminine lover, but as a negotiation of several power hierarchies in an amorous relationship. For each poet, these dynamics play out differently, and in poetry cycles much can be shifted. While Beatrice is known to be the virtuous and lofty unattainable woman in Dante’s love poetry, Dante also presents a very different woman and very different speaker-lover in his Rime petrose cycle, “La crudele.” Here the stone woman may be the more powerful one in the relationship, as Dante also does depict Beatrice, but the Donna Pietra is not virtuous and seems to be the aggressor who overtakes the fleeing speaker-lover. In the last of the four poems, “Così nel mio parlar voglio esser aspro,” rape imagery and the notion of eros as revenge are intersected with imagery of the liturgical hours (66-73): 
S’io avessi le belle trecce prese,
che fatte son per me scudiscio e ferza,
pigliandole anzi terza,
con essere passerei vespero e squille:
e non sarei pietoso né cortese,
anzi farei com’orso quando scerza;
e se Amor me ne sferza,
io mi vendicherei di più di mille. [3]
The imagery of the bear is from an old proverb: if you don't want to get bitten, don’t play with a bear. Here the speaker-lover expects a violent sex act on the part of both parties. The church bells show the passage of night, but they also lend a sacred sense to the representation, especially considering that Dante brings imagery from this poem into Paradiso XXVI (discussed below).
The conflation of erotic and spiritual imagery that we see in Dante’s poem above has existed intrinsically within mystical writing from its origins, and there are many surprising overlaps between mystic and courtly writing. Barbara Newman describes 13th-century Beguine writing as “la mystique courtoise,” arguing that writers such as Hadewijch, Mechthild, and Marguerite Porete experiment with polyvalent subjectivity, sometimes as the beloved bride of Christ the bridegroom and sometimes as the knight-errant longing for his/her faraway beloved. Hadewijch, for example, twins “I” and “she” in her lyric poetry, “indistinguishable from the troubadour’s,” and even pretends to abandon love and spurn her beloved, which “only initiates will recognize … as God” (148). Beguine mysticism adopted both the monastic allegorical tradition surrounding the Song of Songs as well as a courtly love tradition: “In combination, the two discourses may reinforce each other or they may work at cross-purposes, almost incidentally conferring dual gender on both the lover and the divine Beloved” (138). In Italy, too, is a tradition of mystic writing that predates Catherine especially in Franciscan circles, with Iacopone da Todi (c. 1230-1306) being a particular exemplar whose words found resonances in wider literature. I would add that it is not just the mystics who are combining the two threads of Song of Songs subjectivity-shifting monasticism and courtly love, for how else can Dante bring erotic and spiritual language together into his courtly love poetry, but also ultimately into Paradiso?
Even in the writing of the poet considered the most secular of the dolce stil novo group, Guido Cavalcanti, donna (again, related to dominus) is employed throughout his poetry (the famous “Donna me prega” is considered here in particular), displacing power from the masculine speaker to the feminine beloved. Unlike the beloved of some of his contemporary poets, Cavalcanti’s beloved is not depicted as cruel, stingy with her love, nor is she in any way punished for her power over him; instead he is a willing servant to her and happy to suffer for his love. This resembles the mystic’s relation to God, as the mystic is always full of love and ready to serve her lord. As Dana Stewart explains, for Cavalcanti the donna is equipped with the Platonic model of active eyes, while the speaker has the Aristotelian model of passive eyes (49). The words for eyes (occhi) and other vision-based words including light (lume), are used throughout love poetry and mystical writing; Cavalcanti, who writes in a very philosophical manner, uses these terms as they relate to the science of optics, as he was aware of it in his time. In discussing Cavalcanti within the theoretical cinematic model of the male gaze, Stewart writes, “The poet-lover exerts no controlling gaze over her [his beloved],” revealing his relative subordination to the beloved (54). Intellectually, as will be discussed below, Cavalcanti is unable to grasp the image of his beloved, which further demonstrates his lack of power in relation to the woman who exists in an ineffable state.
In both mystical and courtly love writing, shifting subjectivities are constantly in flux, as they are in Catherine’s writing. While Beguine mystics may often operate within a traditional role reversal with Christ as love object, Dante and other Italian poets depict throughout their texts a negotiation between the one who is the beloved and the lover. Catherine transposes relations so that she instead is the one that God is after, as can be seen in the Dialogo as well as her Orazioni: 
...o pazzo d’amore! Hai tu bisogno della tua creatura? Sì, a quanto mi pare; parché tu tieni dei modi, come se tu non potessi vivere senza di lei, sabbene tu sia vita, da cui ogni cosa ha vita, e senza di te nessuna cosa vive. Perché dunque sei così impazzito? Perché tu t’innamorasti della tua fattura, ti compiacesti e dilettasti in te medesimo di lei, e, come inebriato della sua salute, la vai cercando, mentre ella ti fugge? Ella si allontana, e tu ti appressi a lei; non potevi venire più vicino, che vestendoti della sua umanità (Dialogo 153).[4]


O amore ineffabile, benché nella tua luce tu vedessi tutte le iniquità che la tua creatura doveva commettere contro la tua infinita bontà, tu hai come fatto finta di non vedere, e hai fermato lo sguardo sulla bellezza della tua creatura, della quale tu, come pazzo ed ebbro d’amore, ti sei innamorato, e per amore l’hai tratta da te dandole l’essere a tua immagine e somiglianza. Tu, verità eterna, hai dichiarato a me la tua verità, cioè che è stato l’amore a costringerti a crearla; benché tu vedessi che ti doveva offendere, la tua carità non ha voluto che tu fermassi l’occhio in questo vedere, ma al contrario hai distolto i tuoi occhi da questa offesa che doveva avvenire e li hai fermati sulla bellezza della creatura. Se tu avessi fermato lo sguardo in quell’offesa, avresti dimenticato l’amore che avevi per creare l’uomo. E non ti fu nascosto questo, ma ti sei fermato all’amore, perché tu non sei altro che fuoco d’amore, pazzo della tua creatura  (Orazione 4).[5]
Catherine depicts God as a sort of Pygmalion figure in love with his creation — not only in love, but madly and drunkenly and crazily in love[6] with her (Catherine uses creatura, a feminine noun, but she also refers to his creation as uomo). She talks about love as ineffable, a metaphor for self knowledge, and also of his beloved straying from the pursuing love, an allegory of the sinning human escaping God. She discusses God becoming man in Christ, and how that resolves some of the lovers’ tension, though man will always be expected to sin. The prayer in particular speaks to God’s not giving up on his creation—the errant knight who continuously pursues his beloved.
Love poetry is often thought of as an exchange between two individuals, or even just the solitary writing of one party to another disinterested one (as the act of writing itself is often conflated with working alone). However courtly love poetry is inherently part of a larger community: the court. As Newman explains, the amorous couple is never truly alone and is always enveloped by friends, foes, or jealous members of the court. She writes (142),
A fulfilled relationship could overcome the solipsism of immature lovers and blossom into what Chrétien de Troyes called the Joy of the Court. In his Erec et Énide, high festival is held when mature lovers also achieve the integration of private desire with social responsibility. 
That is, there is an assimilation of the private to the public within courtly love, which is also a topos for the mystic. Newman demonstrates this negotiation in her discussion of the Beguine mystic in particular. The mystic is surrounded by spiritual friends and is often in the position of sharing her bridegroom of Christ with them. In states of ecstasy, the mystic is often with others, dictating her experience to scribes, thus making a very private and erotic affair an aspect of the wider spiritual community of which she is part. While some cloistered or otherwise reclusive mystics, like Hildegard, are members of a much smaller community (though certainly still a community nonetheless), mystics like Catherine who are engaged with society invariably have social responsibility as a larger aspect of their mysticism and love with Christ. Therefore, in a figure like Catherine, the topos of community within courtly love is particularly strong, and she must not consider just herself and her lover alone but all the societal implications as an aspect of her mystical experiences and writing.
A typical component of courtly love is the giving of gifts and their joyful reception by the lady. Though generally the gifts that Christ and God bestow upon the mystics are the virtues (charity, chastity), or tribulations such as poverty and illness,[7] Catherine (and a few other women who experienced mystical marriages with Christ) states that she like all Christians receive a foreskin ring from Christ.[8] She considers this to be more precious than a jewel, but the gift exchange is in keeping with courtly love motifs and plotlines. Further, the exchange of hearts between lovers is the utmost expression of passion in courtly love poetry. Dante mentions that the allegorical figure of Love holds his heart within his hands in the first poem of La vita nuova in Chapter III (9-11): 
Allegro mi sembrava Amor tenendo
meo core in mano, e ne le braccia avea
madonna involta in un drappo dormendo.[9] 
More cruelly, Boccaccio’s Tancredi serves the heart of Ghismonda’s lover in a golden chalice for her to eat in the first story of the fourth day of the Decameron. In non-mystical literature, the exchange and displacement of the heart is usually expressed in metaphorical terms (at least when all parties are alive), with one of the two individuals expressing to the other that they have full control over the other’s heart, in mysticism this exchange of hearts can be quite literal. According to Raymond, Catherine herself exchanged hearts with Christ, with her heart beating inside his body and Christ’s heart contained within her body for three days. Heather Webb notes that this exchange is not depicted within Catherine’s own writing,[10] but another example of literal heart exchange is also present in the mystic writing of Lutgardis in the early 13th century. Though the motif of jewel exchange may occupy a literal space in courtly love poetry but a figurative position in mystic writing, the aspect of community is in many ways heightened within mystical writing and the exchange of hearts rendered in very literal terms.
Another aspect of courtly love is the unattainable beloved, generally the unattainable lady. For troubadours, and in courtly cycles like that of Lancelot and Guinevere, the unattainable beloved is typically a woman socially elevated above the pursuing lover-errant, or, worse yet, a married woman (often the queen). This could generally be couched in language that was not offensive to the nobleman married to the woman, and often invoked the exemplary virtue of the lady, who was generally perceived to be noble not only in class but also in honor. As courtly love poetry removed itself from the court (as in the Tuscan School and the subsequent dolce stil novo), the topos of the beloved queen began to be effaced from the literature, but the sense of the lady’s praiseworthiness was not diminished. The 13th-century poet, Guido Guinizzelli, exemplifies the virtuous nature of the beloved in his lyric poem, “Io voglio del ver la mia donna laudare,” in which the speaker explains that all whom the lady greets lose their pride (“ch’abassa orgoglio a cui dona salute” (10)), and that no one can have bad thoughts when they behold her. The speaker, for his part, grows to be more virtuous, as well (12-14):
e no·lle pò apressare om che sia vile;
ancor ve dirò c’ha maggior vertute:
null’ om pò mal pensar fin che la vede.[11]
Similarly, in his canzone “Donne ch’avete intelletto d'amore,” in chapter XIX of the Vita nova, Dante writes of a woman who perishes any man who is with sin, while any man who can withstand to look at her has sin erased from him by God (32-42):
...che quando va per via,
gitta nei cor villani Amore un gelo,
per che onne lor pensero agghiaccia e pere;
e qual soffrisse di starla a vedere
diverria nobil cosa, o si morria.
E quando trova alcun che degno sia
di veder lei, quei prova sua vertute,
ché li avvien, ciò che li dona, in salute,
e sì l’umilia, ch'ogni offesa oblia.
Ancor l’ha Dio per maggior grazia dato
che non pò mal finir chi l’ha parlato.[12]
 These two women are acting as servants of God, eradicating sin in their wake, or else further elevating those who are able to look at them. Additionally, the sonnet “Tanto gentile e tanto onesta pare” from chapter XXVI of Vita nova, Dante remarks on how the lady is dressed in humility (“benignamente d’umilità vestuta” (6)), and how she seems to have been sent to Earth from Heaven: “e par che sia una cosa venuta / da cielo in terra a miracol mostrare” (7-8).[13] This construction — someone to love sent from Paradise to perform miracles within human society — is markedly similar to another who is beloved: Christ. 
Thus, more than an Earthly queen, the true ultimate expression of the inaccessible beloved is one who is in Heaven, and both Dante and Petrarch eventually employed this solution in their post-mortem figures of Beatrice and Laura respectively. While both ladies are considered to be within the kingdom of Paradise, and therefore within the general milieu of the court, for Dante in particular the figure of Beatrice, so virtuous and beatific, can be mapped onto the beloved of the mystic: Christ. First appearing within the Commedia in Canto XXX of the earthly canticle of Purgatorio, Beatrice would go on to literally and figuratively bring Dante up and into Paradise. The unattainable beloved is not only a woman of a higher class, but of nobler virtue, and the good lady serves to elevate her lover to a higher plane. Christ, too, works this way for believers on earth, and the mystics address this aspect of Christ. In a Letter to Queen Elizabeth of Hungary, Catherine writes (T145):
Quale cuore si potrebbe tenere che non scoppiasse d’amore a ragguardare questo dolce e saporoso frutto, cioè il dolce e buono Gesù? il quale Dio Padre ha dato per sposo alla santa Chiesa. Dobbiamo dunque correre come innamorati, ed essere amatori della Chiesa santa per lo amore di Cristo crocifisso.[14] 
Upon seeing the bridegroom Christ, any Christian should be compelled to action, running to the Church, overwhelmed with goodness. As an unattainable (until death) beloved who also compels his lover to make himself or herself more virtuous, Christ is the ultimate object of courtly love devotion, a tradition that goes back to French poet Chrétien de Troyes and the holy grail as introduced in his unfinished 12th-century romance Perceval, le Conte du Graal.
Guido Cavalcanti, whose work is among the least spiritually-inclined of the dolce stil novo poets, also notes how the virtue of his lady elevates the speaker-lover; she is like a divine goddess in his lyric poem of praise “Chi è questa che vèn, ch’ogn’om la mira” (9-14):
Non si poria contar la sua piagenza,
ch’a le’ s’inchin’ ogni gentil vertute,
e la beltate per sua dea la mostra.
Non fu sì alta già la mente nostra
e non si pose in noi tanta salute,
che propriamente n’aviam canoscenza.[15]
For Cavalcanti, intellectual nobility may be higher than an orientation to the divine, but the same premise stands, as the beloved’s graciousness elevates the lover. Here Cavalcanti brings to bear another element that intersects with virtue: the ineffability that comes when the lover attempts to understand the lady’s goodness. The speaker cannot even fully describe her beauty (how pleasing she is), and when he tries to fathom her he explains that he is incapable of doing so within his own limitations. This inability to comprehend is echoed in the longer poem “Donna me prega,” which also considers the optics as discussed above. On this, Stewart writes, “when he does speak of his perceptual appropriation of her, he emphasizes that his mind cannot fully grasp her image,” which suggests that it is not just the virtues of the lady that are ineffable, but her entire being and all that she represents (53). The inability lies not just in understanding the beloved, but in not understanding love and the virtues of love as an abstract concept.
This language is also consistent with religious language about God and self-knowledge, and Dante’s words as he progresses through Paradise, which begins in Canto I (“Nel ciel che più de la sua luce prende / fu’ io, e vidi cose che ridire / né sa né può chi di là sù discende”[16] (4-6)) and culminates in Canto XXXIII: “per tal modo / che ciò ch’i’ dico è un semplice lume,”[17] “credo ch’i’ vidi,”[18] “Omai sarà più corta mia favella, / pur a quel ch’io ricordo, che d’un fante / che bagni ancor la lingua a la mammella”[19] (89-90, 92, 106-108). Dante, as he travels through Heaven, believes that he forgets, can only speak of what he saw in rudimentary language, can only attest to what he believes he saw, and ultimately sees how incapable he is at describing what he has seen. In the first lines of Laude 91, Iacopone da Todi discusses love that is outside of language, and goodness that cannot be thought of, alongside light that is beyond measure: “Sopr’onne lengua amore, bontà senza figura, / lume fuor de mesura, resplende nel mio core”[20] (1-2). Iacopone describes how love of God is not possible to quantify through calculations, language, or figures. Divine love, for poets and mystics alike, is outside of the capacity of human expression. As in Orazione 4 above, Catherine describes love as “ineffabile,” and God and Love can be considered to be one and the same. Throughout her Dialogo, she uses variants of the word “ineffabile” 30 times over its 167 chapters, pairing it with variants of “amore” or “amare” 80% of the time (in 24 instances). In chapter 96, Catherine writes of the limitation of speech in describing union with God:
Qual lingua potrebbe narrare l’eccellenza di questo ultimo stato unitivo, e i frutti diversi e svariati che in esso si ricevono, essendo riempite le tre potenza dell’anima? … E così via discorrendo, tutti ve l’hanno manifestata, chi per un modo e chi per un altro. Ma non potresti mai narrare l’intrinseco sentimento, l’ineffabile dolcezza e l’unione perfetta con me, con la tua lingua che è cosa finita.[21]
Catherine evokes the finiteness of the tongue’s capabilities at odds with the infinite quality of love and the divine. While she explains that doctors of the Church have revealed the glorious light through the Holy Scripture, this writing is also limited because love cannot be described until one experiences it. Although both Dante and Catherine suggest that the experience of divine love is not outside of human capacity, putting this experience into words seems beyond what the human is capable of. This translates to the mystic or other religious figure unable to fully understand the mechanisms of God’s love. The mystic is a participant of this infinite love, but not the originator of it, and she cannot render that aspect of love to others in human language. Despite being unable to produce divine love, the mystic remains a devoted servant to her lover just the same, steadfast and firm in her love.
The love that the mystic experiences and participates in is an overwhelming love; it overtakes the lover. Iacopone describes how self-annihilation and love are the only methods available to humans in order to contemplate God (Laude 91, 231-234):
Mai trasformatione perfecta non può fare
né senza te regnare amor, quanto sia forte.
Ad sua possessione non può virtù menare,
né mente contemplare, se de te non ha sorte.[22]
More than being unable to speak, the self must be negated in order to approach the divine, and in turn the self must be filled with love. Throughout Iacopone’s work is a discussion of union in such a way that “Fuoco né ferro non li può partire,”[23] revealing how the self is truly merged with God (Laude 90, 43). In a letter to the Dominican Bartolomeo Dominici, Catherine suggests that this love, where the self is completely eradicated, is the ultimate expression of love: 
con desiderio di vedervi tanto annegato e affocato in Cristo Gesù, che al tutto vi perdiate voi medesimo. Ma questo non veggo che potiate avere se l’occhio dell’intelletto del vero desiderio non si leva sopra di voi a ragguardare l’occhio ineffabile della divina carità col quale Dio ragguardò (e ragguarda) la sua creatura, prima che ci creasse.[24] 
The negation of self, enflamed in this love, can only be achieved when the intellectual eye rises to look into the ineffable eye of divine charity. Again, we see the trope of the unexplainable, with the eye of divine charity that cannot be described. This all-encompassing love is similarly a common trope in courtly love poetry, as exemplified in 13th-century poet Guido delle Colonne’s lyric “Amor, che lungiamente m’ai menato,” as he discusses being ridden by love against his will, citing Virgil’s “Amor che vince tutto” (24) among his arguments. Like Catherine’s depiction of the “pazzo d’amore” and feelings of drunkenness and madness while experiencing love, Guido also speaks to this loss of rational self (53-55):
Amor fa disviare li più sagi,
e chi più ama e pena à in sè misura;
più folle è quello che più si ‘nnamura.[25]
The idea of measure in courtly poetry expresses the Aristotelian idea of the mean, and how one should conduct oneself with constancy. However, as Guido writes in this poem, love unravels these systems to render the wise incapable of competing with the force of love. For Guido, this may be considered contrary to human order, but as Catherine continues in her letter, this is how one must approach God, who is also a mad lover, “La quale poiché ragguardò in sé medesimo, innamorossene smisuratamente; tanto che per amore ci creò, volendo che noi godessimo e participassimo quello bene che aveva in sé medesimo” (T204).[26] In courtly love this reciprocity between equal lovers is often not exemplified in this way for it operates outside the hierarchies of the human court, but as love poetry is blended with spirituality by Dante, he navigates “l’amor che move il sole e l’altre stelle” (XXXIII, 142-145).
        In fact, Dante incorporates some of the work of his mystical predecessors directly into the Paradiso, notably in Canto XXXIII, where he borrows language from Iacopone da Todi. This use of mystical writing in the canticle of heaven may be unsurprising, but it indicates how highly Dante esteemed the writing of his religious counterparts. As Mario Aversano writes (7), 
Ma ci è parso utile evidenziare dapprincipio anche le avvisaglie ... e mostrare la loro consonanza con il solo poeta-teologo che si incontra alle spalle di Dante: Iacopone da Todi. La sua opera, come poi la Commedia, si sostanzia degli articoli del codice sacro più importante del Medioevo: quello intitolato alla Conversione.[27]
Aversano’s monograph, Dante, Iacopone da Todi e il canto XXXIII del Paradiso shows the resonances of Iacopone’s writing in Dante’s Paradiso, revealing that Dante’s literary approach to spirituality is not entirely unique but built upon the writing of others, and Iacopone’s in particular. In Laude 59, Iacopone writes on nature, the will, and moving from earth to heaven (22-25):
Luna, sole, cielo & stelle fra miei tesor non son covelle,
de sopra cielo sì ston quille che tengon la mia melodìa.
Poi che Dio ha l mio velle, possessor d’onnecovelle,
le mie ale hon tante penne de terra en cielo non m’è via.[28]
Comparing the lines with XXXIII, 138-145, it is possible to see similarities in the rhymes and general sense of the meaning:
l’imago al cerchio e come vi s’indova;
ma non eran da ciò le proprie penne:
se non che la mia mente fu percossa
da un fulgor in che sua voglia venne.
A l’alta fantasia qui mancò possa;
ma già volgeva il mio disio e ‘l velle
sì come rota ch’igualmente è mossa,
l’amor che move il sole e l’altre stelle.[29]
The important resonances here are the rhyming words: “stelle,” “velle,” “penne.” These words and their sounds are too similar to be coincidental, and moreover there is the parallel meaning that deals with the will and being overcome by the divine. What Dante does that may subvert Iacopone’s meaning somewhat is that he sees God in nature, as it is God’s love that moves the sun and the other stars, but for Iacopone the moon, sun, sky, and stars are only small treasures compared to divinity. Iacopone does not grant the same thread from God to the earth that Dante does, though his work provides a vocabulary for Dante to build upon in his own spiritually-minded poetry.
Working throughout the Commedia, Dante also blends his own previous works into his more religiously-minded epic. Many have argued that these examples are palinodes employed to distance his current work from earlier writing that was not as spiritually informed as his opus would prove to be. An example of this is in Canto V of Inferno, where Francesca and Paolo are damned for their amorous love that arose from reading about courtly love. Sara Sturm-Maddox also discusses the connection between the Rime petrose and Purgatorio, particularly with the figure of the Medusa, and how Dante must rid himself of this former life in order to pass into the Earthly Paradise.[30] However, Dante does not purge himself of courtly or erotic language altogether, and even uses the imagery of love’s teeth biting him in both his Rime petrose and in Canto XXVI of Paradiso:
Io mio penser di fuor sì che si scopra,
ch’io non fo de la morte, che ogni sense
co li denti d’Amor già mi manduca[31]


Ma dì ancor se tu senti altre corde
tirarti verso lui, sì che tu suone
con quanti denti questio amor ti morde[32]
Although this is not a direct citation, the image of love’s teeth biting him cannot be a coincidence, and the repetition of sense and thought in the surrounding context deepens that connection. Dante, then, does not see courtly and erotic love as outside of a divine context and, given that Dante is approved by the blessed in this Canto, he must not believe that there is an incongruity between amorous love and love for God. This incomplete departure suggests a rhetoric of courtly love consistent and compatible with a mystical discourse. Catherine herself employs the imagery of teeth of desire in Letter T118 to Caterina dello Spedaluccio and Giovanna di Capo in 1377: “E non vogliate sempre stare al latte: chè ci conviene disponere i denti del desiderio ad ammorsare il pane duro e muffato, se bisognasse.”[33] Though this imagery is more about desire to love God despite being faced with obstacles, the common metaphor shows how teeth can be a pliable image concerned with desiring God. 
Arguing in her essay, “The Sexual Body in Dante’s Celestial Paradise,” that Dante co-opts courtly and erotic language throughout Paradiso, F. Regina Psaki emphasizes that in Paradise the soul is not actually without body, as after the Last Judgement souls will be joined with their bodies once again. Instead, she views erotic, embodied love as a site of redemption. Noting the innovative language of Dante, including neologism, she writes, “The colonization of the language of courtship, caress, intercourse, and orgasm as components of divine bliss would have struck a contemporary reader not because it was unprecedented, but precisely because it is not deployed in familiar fashion as simply a figure for the love which joins risen mankind and God” (57). Though it is clear that Dante’s ingenious and masterful use of language is ripe with poetic force and meaning, I would like to suggest that his words that relate to corporeal and erotic romance, intercourse and orgasm were already a part of mystical writing, not just in the writing of the Beguine mystics, but also in Italy (the Franciscans Iacopone da Todi, Clare of Assisi, and Angela of Foligno predate the writing of the Commedia), and that they would persist after his writing. We cannot be sure that Dante was reading mystical writing, but it is unlikely that his contemporary reader would be as struck by the conflation of eroticism and redemption as a reader of the 21st century may well be, for spirituality for us seems loosened from the passionate love so embedded in late medieval writing. The language of the mystic would have been circulating in the broader Italian culture and the very erotic nature of texts that treat the divine, such as Dante’s courtly love epic, would likely be in dialogue with these texts.
   
Fig. 2. Word cloud of Petrarch’s Rerum vulgarium fragmenta
  

Fig. 3. Word cloud of Catherine’s Letters


Petrarch, the other towering poet of the Italian 14th century, works in a more introspective manner than many of the poets who precede him. In describing Dante’s approach to poetry, Giuseppe Mazzotta argues that Dante is on a quest for “visionary poetry that would bind together various strands of experience against the partitions and fragmentations engendered by critical, analytical thinking,” whereas Petrarch views poetry “as the act by which fame is acquired and death is conquered” (12). Indeed, Petrarch’s conception of poetry can be perceived as a departure from the spiritually-minded work of his predecessor Dante, but ultimately they are both working with the idea of everlasting life. Petrarch, like his contemporary Catherine, travelled throughout Italy and to Provence, an itinerant poet. He wrote the poetry of his Rerum vulgarium fragmenta[34] over 40 years and continued to reorder the work, dealing more with fragments than the unified vision that Dante followed from his Vita nova through the Commedia. Though this poetry collection, famed for inspiring centuries of secular love poetry throughout Europe, may not popularly be read as a religious text, his 366 poems follow the 365 days of the liturgical calendar (with an introduction); he famously met Laura on Good Friday, and the last canzone is dedicated to the Virgin. 
In considering the two word clouds above, there is significant overlap between Petrarch’s poetry collection and Catherine’s corpus of letters — also a fragmentary piece of writing that was done over many years, though not quite with the same editorial hand that Petrarch employed. Petrarch, unlike Dante, is defined by torment, and the words with negative connotations are more pronounced in Petrarch’s word cloud. The words that map over each other between Catherine and Petrarch include “dolce,” “amore,” “fuoco / foco,” and “lume” directly. The word “anima” is common to both, but much more frequently used in Catherine’s work, and “morte” is common to both but more used in Petrarch’s poems. Both are concerned with speech and words — Catherine uses “dico” frequently whereas Petrarch uses “parole.” They are both interested in desire and want, with Petrarch making use of the word “desio” often and Catherine using “vuole.” In terms of words of a more negative register, in addition to “morte,” Catherine uses words like “pena” and words concerned with the crucifixion (“crocifisso,” “sangue”), and Petrarch opts for “dolor” with more despondent words like “ombra,” “lagrime,” “grave.” A departure between the two is Petrarch’s use of natural words like “verde,” “ciel(o),” “terra,” “natura,” and words that are concerned with seeing like “vista,” “veder,” and “occhi,” which are also common to Dante. A suffering lover like his courtly predecessors, Petrarch bears a cross for Laura, which leads to suffering that peaks at Sonnetto 365 where the speaker laments having loved a mortal creature over God, and the “tu” that had been reserved for Laura now addresses God in a melancholic love of last resort: “Tu che vedi i miei mali indegni et empi, / Re del cielo invisibile immortale”[35] (5-6). The last canzone, which has the semblance of redemption is not an entirely earned resolution, but still speaks to the movement from the beloved to the divine. Though he is turned into himself and is unable to find an ultimate solution against the schism within himself, he still projects onto the beloved as a means to approach the divine, consistent with Catherine’s own language of “self-knowledge.” 
The turn from Laura to the Virgin at the end of his Rime sparse works in the direction of transforming the work into a chain of love that operates between God and humankind. The Virgin is now the object of his love as she stands in as a figure marked by an intimate love relationship with God. The poem becomes a prayer, rife with ritualized and formulaic language that also recalls Dante’s own prayer to the Virgin in Paradiso XXXIII.[36] Speaking of Petrarch’s fascination with monastic spirituality, Mazzotta writes, “It can be said that Petrarch broadens the vast fields of theological reflection at the very moment when he confronts the figments of his vision and the demons of his own self. This is Petrarch’s radical project” (166). That is, Petrarch’s religious writing like De otio religioso do not do the same work that the Rime sparse do truly to expand religious experience in a way that does not relegate it to confined spaces. This mediation between the divine and the secular is evident in Petrarch’s poetic understanding of the Virgin, borrowed from Dante’s Paradiso XXXIII[37] (27-29):
Vergine pura, d’ogni parte intera,
del tuo parto gentil figliuola et madre,
ch’allumi questa vita, et l’atra adorni[38]
The Virgin as mediatrix, who illuminates this life, and adorns the other, working between the poet and the divine, and as a paradoxical woman who is both daughter and mother of her offspring (and later “madre, figliuola et sposa” (47)), serves as a figure who complicates the many fragments of Petrarch’s work and vision.
As exemplified in the figure of the Virgin, one of the more striking aspects of Petrarch’s poetry is his use of paradox and oxymoron, which is frequently employed in mystical writing. Catherine and other mystics like Iacopone use oxymoron in many instances to begin to describe their respective relations to God, or that which is ineffable. In her first Orazione, she sets up a series of binaries, showing how low a creature she is compared to her creator:
Tu, deità, somma sapiencia, io ignorante e misera creatura, e tu somma ed etterna bontà; io morte e tu se’ vita, io tenebre e tu luce, io stoltizia e tu sapiencia, tu infinito e io finita, io inferma e tu medico, io fragile peccatrice che non t’amai mai; tu bellezza purissima e io sozzissima creatura.[39]
The creature represents wretchedness, folly, death, darkness, ignorance and finiteness, while the creator represents all the opposite virtues. The opposing words occurring in close succession create a dizzying effect, and ultimately do not prove to be contradictory as the creature is made of the creator, so the divine (and conceivably the human) can occupy this paradoxical position. Similarly, Petrarch uses oxymoron and paradox throughout his Rime sparse, notably in his Sonnet 134 that treats death and life, hate and love, imprisonment and freedom: “Pace non trovo, et non ò da far guerra; / e temo, et spero; et ardo, et son un ghiaccio” (1-2).[40] The speaker-lover is unable to find peace despite being done with war, and fears and hopes and burns and freezes. Like Catherine, Petrarch juxtaposes contradicting words against each other, to describe his current, love-struck dizzying state. Catherine takes love and hatred in turn as well, as she depicts the soul, which must feed on other souls (that is, winning them to salvation) in her Dialogo: “Dico che ella mangia, prendendo in cibo le anime sulla mensa della santissima croce… Dico che lo schiaccia coi denti, altrimenti non lo potrebbe inghiottire; lo schiaccia con l’odio e con l’amore” (161).[41] Invoking oxymoronic language to describe a paradoxical situation (a soul eating other souls in order to save them) is poetically fitting and makes it possible for Catherine to render this difficult experience in language. For many 14th-century writers, both earthly and divine love exist as experiences outside of the full range of human language, and they rely on literary devices like paradox to attempt to convey these personal events to others.
The mingling of erotic and spiritual love within the context of literature is something that was likely enabled through the context of mystical writing that preceded the writing of lyrics and epics. As both types of love are ultimately ineffable, both poets and mystics attempt to approach their beloveds and their own subjectivity as the lover through similar literary devices ranging from allegory and metaphor to oxymoron and paradox. In considering texts from both a distant perspective through computational analysis and through a close reading with historical context, innovative approaches developed by both mystics and poets working in emerging vernacular languages are brought to light as they each grapple with describing the indescribable in order to reach others through their words.










________________
[1] The Commedia is an epic poem, but Dante’s writing stems from lyric poetry and courtly love poetry of the Italian schools, and his epic work is very much grounded in these traditions. I’ll be using “lyric poetry” as a shorthand for that tradition while discussing works related to the overarching tradition.
[2] Vocabolario della Accademia della Crusca, 2011. http://vocabolario.sns.it/html/index.html 
[3] “Oh, if I could but seize those lovely tresses which have become both whip and lash for me, / from very early matins / I’d make them ringing bells unto the night: / and I would not be pitying or kind, / but like a playful bear with her I’d play; / and, since Love whips me still, / I would avenge myself a thousandfold” (tr. Tusiani, p. 99). 
[4] “...oh mad lover! And you have need of your creature? It seems so to me, for you act as if you could not live without her, in spite of the fact that you are Life itself, and everything has life from you and nothing can have life without you. Why then are you so mad? Because you have fallen in love with what you have made! You are pleased and delighted over her within yourself, as if you were drunk [with desire] for her salvation. She runs away from you and you go looking for her. She strays and you draw closer to her. You clothed yourself in our humanity, and nearer than that you could not have come” (trans. Noffke).
[5] “Oh unutterable love, even though you saw all the evils that all your creatures would commit against your infinite goodness, you acted as if you did not see and set your eye only on the beauty of your creature, with whom you had fallen in love like one drunk and crazy with love. And in love you drew us out of yourself, giving us being in your own image and likeness. You, eternal Truth, have told me the truth: that love compelled you to create us. Even though you saw that we would offend you, your charity would not let you set your eyes on that sight. No, you took your eyes off the sin that was to be and fixed your gaze only on your creature’s beauty. For if you had concentrated on the sin, you would have forgotten the love you had for creating humankind. Not that the sin was hid from you, but you concentrated on the love because you are nothing but a fire of love, crazy over what you have made” (trans. Noffke as Prayer 13, 18 February 1379).
[6] This mystical expression of the experience of love is long-resonating, as being drunk and crazy in love are still very much a part of western culture’s love rhetoric, as exemplified in Beyoncé’s “Crazy in Love” (2003) and “Drunk in Love” (2013). Consider also how erotic and spiritual imagery play out in other pop songs, such as Madonna’s “Like a Prayer” (1989).
[7] Here Newman cites the Règle des Fins Amans: “The fin amant is exhorted to think of her lover often, to seek out his favorite haunts, and to receive the jewels he sends her gladly, although these consist of ‘poverty, diseases, maladies, and tribulations’” (141).
[8] T221.
[9] “Joyfully Amor seemed to me to hold / my heart in his hand, and held in his arms / my lady wrapped in a cloth sleeping” (Trans. A. S. Kline)
[10] See “Catherine of Siena’s Heart,” pp. 815-816.
[11] I paraphrase: Vile people cannot behold her / I become more virtuous [because of her] / No one that has bad thoughts can look at her. 
[12] “...since when she goes by / Love strikes a chill in evil hearts, / so that all their thoughts freeze and perish: / and any man who suffers to stay and see her / becomes a noble soul, or else he dies. / And when she finds any who might be worthy / to look at her, he proves her virtue, / which comes to him, given, in greeting / and if he is humble, erases all offense. / Still greater grace God has granted her / since he cannot end badly who speaks with her.” (Trans. A. S. Kline)
[13] “and truly seems a thing come from the sky / to show on earth what miracles can be” Trans. Tusiani.
[14] “What heart could keep from bursting with love at the sight of this sweet savory fruit, our good and gentle Jesus, whom God the Father has given to holy Church as her Spouse? We ought then to run like people in love; as faithful Christians we ought to be lovers of this holy Church, members bound together in this bride, a mystic body.” Trans. Noffke.
[15] “For her sweetness there is no description, / Every gentle virtue bows towards her, / And Beauty makes her its [goddess]. / Our minds can never soar so high, / Nor have we grace enough inside, / For us to ever know her perfectly.” Trans.: A.S. Kline.


[16] “I was within the heaven that receives / more of His light; and I saw things that he / who from that height descends, forgets or can / not speak …” Trans. Mandelbaum, I.4-7.
[17] “in such a way that what / I tell is only rudimentary” Trans. Mandelbaum, XXXIII.89-90.
[18] “I believe that I saw” (my translation).
[19] “What little I recall is to be told, / from this point on, in words more weak than those / of whose infant tongue still bathes at the breast” Trans. Mandelbaum, XXXIII.106-108.
[20] “Love beyond all telling, / Goodness beyond imagining, / Light of infinite intensity / Glows in my heart” (Trans. Serge and Elizabeth Hughes).
[21] “What tongue could describe the marvel of this final unitive stage and the many different fruits the soul receives when its powers are so filled? … And so the light runs on, all of you showing forth, now one way, now another. But the inmost feeling, the ineffable sweetness and perfect union — you cannot describe it with your tongue, which is a finite thing!” (Trans. Noffke.)
[22] “Without you, self-annihilation, / There can be no perfect union, / Nor can love, no matter how strong, reign. / Man without your help / Cannot possess or contemplate God” (Trans. Serge and Elizabeth Hughes). 
[23] “Neither iron nor fire can pry us apart” (Trans. Serge and Elizabeth Hughes).
[24] Letter T204.
“I long to see you engulfed and set on fire in Christ Jesus that you will be completely lost to yourself. But I don’t see how you can unless your mind’s eye rises above yourself in true desire to gaze into the eye of the divine charity with which God looked on his creatures before he created us. And so he still looks on us.” Trans. Noffke. 
[25] “For Love can make the wisest turn astray; / Love, at its most, of measure still has least; / He is the maddest man who loves the best” Trans. Rossetti.
[26] “For he looked on us within himself and fell so boundlessly in love with us that for love he created us to share and enjoy the good he possessed in himself” Trans. Noffke.
[27] “But it seemed useful to highlight also the first signs ... and show their consonance with the only poet-theologian who meets at the shoulders of Dante: Jacopone da Todi. His work, then as the Comedy, takes the form of the articles of the most important sacred code of the Middle Ages: the one entitled as the Conversion” (Translation mine).
[28] “Moon and sun, sky and stars, are but minor treasures: / The treasures that make me burst into song / Lie beyond the sky that you can see. / Since my will is centered in God, who possesses all, / I wind with ease from earth to heaven” (Trans. Serge and Elizabeth Hughes).
[29] “suited the circle and found place in it- / and my own wings were far too weak for that. / But then my mind was struck by light that flashed / and, with this light, received what it had asked. / Here force failed my high fantasy; but my / desire and will were moved already-like / a wheel revolving uniformly-by / the Love that moves the sun and the other stars” (Trans. Mandelbaum). 
[30] See “The Rime Petrose and the Purgatorial Palinode,” 1987.
[31] “Così nel mio parlar voglio esser aspro,” lines 30-32.
“...all my thinking / may so shine through as to be seen outside — / more than I tremble at this death, now biting / all of my senses with the teeth of Love” (29-32) Trans. Tusiani.
[32] Paradiso XXVI 49-51.
“But tell me, too, if you feel other cords / draw you toward Him, so that you voice aloud / all of the teeth by which this love grips you” Trans. Mandelbaum.
[33] “Don’t be satisfied to keep living on milk forever; we have to get the teeth of our desire ready to chew on bread that is hard and moldy, if necessary” (Trans. Noffke).
[34] “Fragments of common things” or “Fragments composed in vernacular,” now often referred to as the “Rime sparse” or “Il canzoniere.”
[35] “You who see my shameful and impious sins, / King of Heaven, invisible, immortal” (Trans. A. S. Klein).
[36] As in “Vergine Madre, figlia del tuo figlio” (XXXIII, 1). 
[37] “«Vergine Madre, figlia del tuo figlio” (Par. XXXIII, 1). 
[38] “Virgin, pure, perfect in every way, / daughter and mother to your noble Son, / you who illuminate this life, adorn the other” (Trans. A.S. Kline).
[39] “I am a foolish and wretched creature / while you are supreme eternal goodness. / I am death / and you are life. / I am darkness / and you are light. / I am ignorance / and you are wisdom. / You are infinite / and I am finite. / I am sick / and you are the doctor. / I am a weak sinner who have never loved you. / You are purest beauty / and I am the filthiest of creatures.” (Trans. Noffke).
[40] “I find no peace, and all my war is done / I fear and hope, I burn and freeze like ice” Trans. Wyatt.
[41] “She eats the food of souls for my honor at the table of the most holy cross … And she chews it (for otherwise she could not digest it) with hatred and love” (Trans. Noffke).