Tagliaferri 
TO ADD 
The Church Father, Saint Jerome wrote, “long as women is for birth and children, she is as different from man as body is from soul. But when she wishes to serve Christ more than the world, then she will cease to be a woman and will be called man” (Bullough 227).
“crossdressing is imitation through transformation, with the result of becoming more like the deity being worshipped” (Bolich 207).  


“[Barbara] Newman’s observation about the importance of the male voice adopted by some women mystics as contrasted with the traditional gender reversal-language employed by male mystics (who often take on the female role as “soul-bride”) shows how gender-identity has often been malleable in the history of Christian mystical discourse. As Saskia Murk-Jansen has suggested, however, such gender reversals were fundamentally intended not so much to reflect preoccupation with gender identity as “to emphasize the fact that the soul’s relationship to od was like nothing they [they mystics] had ever experienced.” [“The Use of Gender and Gender-Related Imagery in Hadewijch” in Gender and Text in the Later Middle Ages, p. 53] The predication of feminine names (like minne) to God, as well as traditional male terms, points in the same direction — God lies beyond all distinctions of gender and the ordinary realms of consciousness. The rich develpments displayed in what we might call the courtly mode” of mystical language … are not exhausted by these innovations regarding gender language.” The Flowering of Mysticism, Bernard McGinn p. 169


Chapter I
Born in 1347 of a wool-dyer father, Caterina di Iacopo di Benincasa chose a religious life against her family’s wishes. At 6 years of age, she had her first mystical vision of Christ, at 7 she made a vow of perpetual virginity to God, and at 21, she married Christ in a vision during which she received a ruby ring visible only to herself. In the years leading to her mystical marriage, she diligently practiced asceticism, which Suzanne Noffke describes as “silent solitude” and “cozy isolationism” (65). In her youth and adolescence, Catherine was largely private, occupying a small room in her father’s house, while practicing daily flagellations and extreme fasting. Because of the severity of her actions, and their effects on her health, Raymond tells his readers that her family required her to keep her door ajar (V, 52). As she had decided early in life to dedicate herself to God, Catherine had initially followed a traditional approach typical of hermitage and cloistering of oneself, a popular form of spirituality through the Middle Ages. Indeed, the 13th and 14th centuries found fertile ground for religious expression in the urban centers of Italy — especially in Siena — with male and particularly female recluses well supported by the city, and visible to society. In the year of Catherine’s birth, 80% of Siena’s recluses were women (Thurber 47). By the second half of the 14th century, urban reclusion, which existed on the boundaries of cities and the boundaries of institutionalized religion, began to decline, while the third order vocations were increasingly considered to be more appropriate channels for female lay religious expression (Thurber 72). Although Catherine had at first seemed content in her reclusive life, she was eventually compelled by God to lead a public life[a].
While Catherine certainly spent her early years as an ascetic, her transition to communal space seems to have been grounded in her experiences. In her youth, she was attracted to the travelling Dominican preachers (Order of Friars Preachers) who came through Siena, and, as Raymond explains, Catherine so esteemed these Dominican friars that she longed to enter their Order to help guide people in spiritual matters. However, Catherine realized that her status as a woman would prevent her from joining them, leading her to consider following Saint Euphrosyne’s model to pass herself as a man (III, 38). As Carolyn Muessig notes, Catherine would eventually prove to be an “itinerant peacemaker, papal representative of sorts, spiritual counselor, theologian, and tireless letter writer” (4). And Raymond himself writes that “her life was to follow lines far different from those of other women,” as God sent her to live among people, working for others in public places (XII, 116). However, it was through communities of civic-minded and spiritual women that Catherine learned and flourished, and throughout her life she served as a community-builder and advocate to both secular and religious, regardless of gender. 
Catherine joined the Mantellate, a tertiary order of the Dominicans consisting of mostly widowed and married laywomen, when she was about 18 years old. The women at first did not want to accept her, as her status as a virgin was not typical of the order, but she was persistent and persuasive, as she would also prove to be in her subsequent political affairs. When Catherine first joined, she was still committed to prayer and solitude, but her work for the ill as a mantellata may have contributed in compelling her to leave her private space. The mantellate were dedicated to caring for the ill and doing good, and it was in hospitals that these groups of women gathered, the center of which in Siena was the Spedale di Santa Maria della Scala, near the Duomo. As Jane Tylus notes, the hospital “...represented an intermediary space between public and private ... for the layperson dedicated to acts of mercy” (68). Because of Siena’s location on the Via Francigena, the ancient pilgrimage route to Rome, the mantellate cared not only for their geographical neighbors but also for many visitors. Thus, Catherine’s position as a lay Dominican proved to be beneficial though her initial desire to be in the mantellate may have seemed contradictory. In this position, she had access to larger circles of people through her affiliation with the Dominicans and was able to engage with people of the world by living outside of a monastery, not unlike her Italian predecessor, Francis of Assisi.
In 1374, Catherine first travels to Florence, and she spends most of 1375 in Pisa, where she cultivated a greater public reputation. While she had started constructing herself as a public figure in Siena, she generated excitement during her extended stay in Pisa and established herself as a public preacher and miracle worker (Capecelatro 107, Tylus 134). It is from Pisa that Catherine begins to engage in intense and frequent letter-writing, often addressing her spiritual and blood famiglia in Siena. In 1376 she travels to Avignon and is credited with the pope’s return to Rome in September of that year, proving herself as effectively engaged in politics. Still, as a woman in the public sphere, she was accused of vainglory, which Raymond sought to defend throughout the last chapter of his Legenda. As one may expect, this is a gendered issue, as Raymond notes her critics claimed, “‘She’s a woman. Why doesn’t she stay in her cell, if it’s God she wants to serve?’” (IV, 365). Raymond writes that both men and women are accusatory, and he uses examples from her fellow mantellate[b], instead proving her sanctity by describing her steadfastness and commitment to the public work of God. In this manner, Raymond is quick to disband Catherine from the urban communities that she is actively involved with, asserting her as a solitary holy figure. 
However, according to the anonymously authored Miracoli di Caterina di Iacopo da Siena, Catherine read aloud to her fellow Mantellate at supper time, which Tylus notes “situates Catherine in a world of women who, far from spreading snide words about her imagined sanctity, are listening to her read...” (127). Meanwhile, Raymond’s own Legenda major, Caffarini’s Leggenda minore and Processo Castellano, Stefano Maconi’s and the Pope’s letters — to name a few — are all indicative of Catherine’s participation not just in a female community but an active interlocutor of the male religious community as well. Her letters on practical matters (to a prostitute, different classes [...])[c], political leaders ( Queen of Naples, Queen of Hungary, King of France ) and concerning the justice system (T273) reveal her participation in wider civic society. Therefore, Catherine of Siena is not a mystic bound by her interiority and other-worldliness, but rather an active force in this world — her contemporary Italy — and a remarkable human who can operate outside and within societal constructs. 
[add info about her texts & about the hagiographies]


Catherine as Writer
        In his 1524 text De institutione feminae christianae, Juan Luis Vives explicates his curriculum for teaching the Christian girl — for his purposes, the future female elite of England. He mentions Catherine of Siena as among the virtuous exempla of Christian women in his chapter “On the Instruction of Young Girls.” As this work is dedicated to the English Queen Catherine of Aragon (mother of Queen Mary I), it would certainly have been remiss of him to not include her namesakes, first Catherine of Alexandria, then “The learned virgin of the same name, Catherine of Siena, [who] left fitting monuments of her genius in which the purity of her saintly intellect is resplendent” (IV, 25). The English translator and editor of the modern edition, Charles Fantazzi, issues a footnote here — “Catherine Benincasa ... was not a very learned woman, as Vives states. She dictated her writings in the beautiful Tuscan vernacular of Siena…” (69). Though Vives may be cultivating the esteem of his patron here, what is interesting is that he is writing prior to Catherine of Siena’s designation as a Church Doctor — a title reserved for those who have contributed to theology or doctrine, and who are regarded as the great teachers of Catholic followers — and Fantazzi glosses the text with some “insight” about Catherine’s lack of learning after this honor. 
Though she lacked a strictly formal education — of the kind that Vives put forth in his instruction manual — Catherine did set out to learn to read. She enlisted the help of her friend Alessa de’ Saracini[d][e] (a woman!) to teach her, and she did successfully learn to read the Tuscan vernacular, as well as physically write it in at least an elementary manner through Alessa’s teaching. I would like to note that at the time, actually writing something down was largely considered a technical skill and scribes were often utilized to render thoughts on the page. Catherine seems to have been an auditory learner, attending scholarly preaching and instructional sessions designed for the Mantellate, and she had a very retentive memory as evidenced by her summoning many Biblical passages by memory in her writing. This sharp memory causes one of her recent biographers and translators, Suzanne Noffke, to question Catherine’s command of Latin, which Raymond stated that she could read and pronounce (though not speak). It seems that Catherine has occasionally misquoted scriptures through corruption of her auditory reception of the texts. Still, her intellectual pursuit of Latin[f][g] reading is evidenced in a letter from Tommaso Caffarini, a follower and biographer (Webb 803).  
Of course, the vernacular language was not considered to be true literacy in a Latinate world. Though Catherine was born half a century after Dante had written De vulgari eloquentia, little had changed regarding the status of the Italian and Latin languages, and what participating in those language communities meant. Latin — the language of upper-class men, intellectual humanists, and the church — presented a clear barrier that prevented common people and women in particular from accessing information. Though Catherine was interested in participating in the same language as this separate and self-monitoring exclusive group (as is evident of her efforts to learn Latin), she consciously and emphatically would choose Sienese Italian as her language of writing and speech. As a religious figure doing good work in the world, offering comfort, advice, and care to the prisoners, penitent women, and ill of Siena, how could she choose to communicate in a language they would not be able to understand? Having learned to write through her own community, and being a publicly-engaged woman who addressed her fellow Sienese in speeches in the piazza or through dispatched letters, Catherine was working to include the poor, sick, uneducated and sinful, rather than exclude them. As both a learner and a teacher of God, tasked with delivering messages of the divine to others, the local language of her time was incredibly instrumental to gain followers and communicate. Indeed, her use of language is remarkably similar to Francis of Assisi’s equity-driven approach to spirituality, as he wrote what are considered to be the first Italian language texts as a means to engage all those in his community who could not understand Latin. His prayer-song, “Cantico delle creature,” even extols the disenfranchised group of non-human animals, appreciating their dignity in being the creatures of God.[1] Catherine’s use of language is consistent with her spirituality (as well as Christ’s inclusive teachings), which is public, community-based, and poetic while also being meaningful and significant. 
Where Catherine did exclude by language was in letters she wrote in her native Sienese to prominent foreign men and women who likely had little or no grasp of Italian. In response to this, Raymond notably would send an accompanying messenger to Pope Gregory XI in order to interpret, viva voce, Catherine’s words into Latin, thus creating a performative and multivalent text (Tylus 161). Though this may be viewed as an intent to diminish Catherine’s Italian, especially when considering that Raymond also quickly worked to have her Libro translated into Latin, this was actually an effective method for retaining Catherine’s agency and community-focused ideals while also accommodating the Pope. As with all of her language-based choices, Catherine’s use of the vernacular in her letters, especially those addressed to the Pope, serves not only a literary choice, but also a political one: Catherine’s activities were directed towards returning the papal seat from France to Italy (Tylus 162). Similarly, Raymond’s work was invested in Catherine’s canonization, and he was well aware that for a female mystic to access the church hierarchy in this way, she would have to be presented in the language of the elite rather than the language of the people. Translating texts into Latin also ensured the circulation of texts across linguistic boundaries, as they could subsequently be translated into local vernaculars (as with the translation of Catherine’s Libro and Raymond’s Vita into English, discussed below). Italian women religious, like Angela of Foligno and Elena da Udine, did not enjoy the same quick canonization that Catherine did, as most of the texts surrounding their lives were in the vernacular. Angela of Foligno (d. 1309) was not canonized until 2013 by the current Pope Francis, and Elena da Udine (d. 1458), whose notarized vernacular life was written by Simone da Roma, was only beatified after[h] Giacomo da Udine’s interesting Latin text that focused on her ascent into heaven (Vita Helenae utinensis).[2] 
Although today we may consider authorial dictation to not be quite the same skill as writing, it is worth noting that the great English poet John Milton was blind by the time he wrote Paradise Lost from 1658 to 1664 (with the second edition written in 1674), and “Contemporary accounts relate that Milton, whose eyes finally failed completely in 1651, would dictate to his daughter Deborah, his nephew, or a paid amanuensis every day” (Farmer 19). There are numerous paintings of Milton dictating to his daughters, including the 1826 painting by Eugène Delacroix, suggesting a romanticizing of the oral epic nature of the text, which calls to mind the great works of classical poets like Homer, but also shows an intimate community between writer and scribe. Also, these paintings do not seem to call into question the fact that the one who is manually writing is female, with authorship remaining firmly with the esteemed male poet Milton. However, this charming literary tableau is not afforded to Catherine. As a driving force of her monograph, Reclaiming Catherine of Siena, Jane Tylus problematizes Catherine as a “producer of words,” only trying to claim that she was “certainly a woman intrigued by the technology of writing and interested in exploiting it for a variety of spiritual reasons” (18). Tylus mentions Stephen Botterill as among the dissenters to Catherine as writer, and it is worth quoting his gloss in the Cambridge History of Italian Literature (considered to be a standard scholarly text) at length (125):
In all these writings Catherine handles the vernacular with subtlety and force, commanding a wide range of tonal registers and using her expressive medium with supple ease and pithy eloquence that make her letters, in particular, one of the monuments of epistolary tradition. But the idea of Catherine as “author” of her own texts bring with it several extra-literary problems that affect interpretation. Born and raised in working-class poverty, and subject, like nearly all women of her century, to virtually complete exclusion from the realm of education and literate culture, she learned to read and write only near the end of her life. Most if not all of her “writings” were thus orally dictated to (male) secretaries, foremost among them the famous friar Raimondo da Capua. It is by no means clear exactly what role these secretaries played in editing, revising or otherwise preparing Catherine’s dictated texts for circulation in manuscript; and any conception of Catherine as a woman writer of the Trecento — a rara avis indeed — needs to be modified by attention to the individual and social realities that govern her work, and which include substantial involvement by men in the preservation of that work in written form.
There are quite a few assumptions made on Botterill’s part here, which stem from a discourse that must modify the woman writing as a “woman writer” rather than a “writer.” Although he will grant that Catherine effectively “handles” language (he does not state that it is her scribes doing this handling), he will not afford her authorship. The neologism “working-class” is anachronistic and unclear — her father was a wool-dyer, a skilled worker and likely providing more than poverty for his family as part of Italy’s growing artisanal class. As is noted in her biographies, Catherine’s family provided her with her own small room within the familial house in which to pray, a luxury not indicative of a poor father. Catherine, a mystic and future saint, chose the life of poverty for herself rather than marry. It is also assumed that education was limited to the realm of a formal education, and that a knowledge of reading and writing could not be attained outside of an elite male institutional study. Even the fact that Catherine went to fellow women to attain literacy suggests that a grassroots-style education could be realized by women and the non-elite living in Siena during her time. Reserving the title of “teacher” or “master” for Christ alone, Catherine clearly was not participating in the same kind of educational system that Botterill describes (Noffke 58). The “literate culture” he refers to is likely the Latin literacy discussed above, a literacy that was exclusionary and inequitable. The note of “(male) secretaries” is also inaccurate, as Catherine employed secretaries from both sexes, as is evidenced in many letters that state which women are there with her.[3] Though the men around her worked to promote Catherine’s spirituality and sainthood, there is little to indicate that they would mishandle her texts — they are part of her famiglia and go to her for advice, why should the assumption be that they would change her words when they, part of Latinate culture, do not prevent her from writing in Italian? 
Concluding that Catherine has little or no control of her dictated texts based on little evidence while assuming that men who used scribes had full control is a problematic stance. While we do not have writing extant in her own hand, we also do not have much of the writing in the hand of male writers from her period, either (including Dante and Francis of Assisi[i][j]). Writing in a communal setting is exactly what we may expect from a figure so embedded in her city and culture, and though in letters to Raymond she notes when she writes in her own hand (as when she learns to do so from John the Evangelist and Thomas Aquinas in letter T272), writing as a solitary and scholarly pursuit alone does not truly capture the full range of the nature of writing. Collaborative writing, as with collaborative visual art, was among the expressions of writing and the arts through the Middle Ages and Renaissance (acknowledging collaborative writing is integral to our understanding of Shakespeare[4]), and to afford some collaborative negotiation as part of Catherine’s writing process is not to diminish her writing and authorship any more than male writers who are also likely not writing entirely alone and never sharing or receiving feedback on their work, which is also likely edited by others. If we are to contextualize Catherine, as Botterill suggests we do, it is to reveal her as a writer of her own time, part of a growing discourse of writing in the developing Italian language, and among the innovators of that language, employing unique and consistent metaphors and imagery while also persuasively enacting diplomacy — indicative of both her poetic prowess and rhetorical style.[5] Writing has always proven to be a site of collaboration and negotiation, and this persists to this day; if we are to problematize Catherine’s authorship, we must also problematize authorship in general, which has a long theoretical history, but is outside of the scope of this present study. For this work, the stance that will be taken is the stance that is afforded to male writers.


[Mystic tradition as being crucial for understanding Catherine’s writing integrated somewhere below]


The Figure of the Mystic
A year before his death, Sigmund Freud writes a single sentence in an entry dated August 22, 1938: “Mysticism is the obscure self-perception of the realm outside the ego, of the id[k]” (“Mystik de dunkle Selbstwahrehmung des Reiches ausserhalb des Ichs, des Es”). Though Freud wrote on mysticism throughout his life, he did not view it as a means to religious redemption, but seemed to couple it more with psychoanalysis itself, as a way to know that which exists outside of the ego, in direct contact with the id.[6] In general, Freud sees mysticism as irrational and in lack of an organizing language, while still probing at an intellectual problem that cannot be grasped by the rational self. Though many theorists will agree with its irrationality and further identify the mystic as a pathological figure, others view mysticism to be a domain into which a specific language is explored and brought to light, beyond the boundaries of learned and self-conscious speech and writing. For feminist theorists, the language is largely charged with amorous expression due to mysticism being intrinsically joined with femininity and a state of loving and even eroticism. 
        In The Second Sex, Simone de Beauvoir characterizes the mystic as a lover desirous of [l]Christ, associated with blood and self-annihilation, and ostensibly a woman. As part of Beauvoir’s argument throughout the broader text, love is assigned to woman as her supreme vocation — that is, she is defined by the loving she does. When a woman loves a man, Beauvoir explains, she is seeking God in this man. Man is the representation of God (or the logos), and as Lacan further demonstrates, “The phallus is the signifier of signifiers, the privileged signifier of that mark in which the role of the logos is joined with the advent of desire” (Écrits 287). For man, reason and desire and the logos are conflated, but as woman is without the phallus, she is relegated to the lover, only capable of desiring the logos, typically in the form of a man. If, Beauvoir writes, human love is denied to her — whether due to her having been disappointed in love, or her having been too selective in choosing a lover — she may seek the logos in the person of God himself. Interestingly, by choosing to direct herself to God, the female mystic is superseding the intermediary force of the male human and is encountering the logos unimpeded, desiring this true signifier of signifiers rather than the corporeal representation of God found in man. The female mystic using love (even desirous love) as a vehicle toward desiring and comprehending the logos is exactly in line with Christian theology, as Dante[m][n][o] so aptly illustrates in erotic language throughout Paradiso[p] by borrowing from the eroticism inherent in the biblical Song of Songs and hagiographies (e.g., St. Francis marrying Poverty).[7] The blending of caritas and eros as a method for approaching the divine and thus the logos or God is a legitimate expression of faith that simultaneously disrupts psychoanalytic gendering of women through their channeling of desirous love to encounter the logos unmediated by masculine accoutrements.
Much of the tension surrounding the mystic in theoretical inquiry pivots around the perception of the mystic as an hysterical figure. Hélène Cixous views the mystic as being aligned with hysteria rather than religiosity — a non-mystical religious woman, for Cixous, is an obsessive-compulsive, whereas an hysterical woman is an artist and revolutionary. In my reading, and as Amy Hollywood notes in general terms, theorists typically denigrate the affective and expressive embodiments of mysticism, though the rare exceptions (Bataille, Beauvoir, Lacan, Irigaray) view these women less pathologically and instead as subversive figures who can effectively merge action and contemplation, emotion and reason, body and soul. Teresa of Avila and Angela of Foligno are discussed in particular, and Beauvoir writes on Joan of Arc and Catherine of Siena as well. 
[more on Beauvoir for each of these ladies]
[more on Catherine’s self-portrayal and involvement of the vita activa, blended with Frazier, why are you bringing Frazier into this]
In her own texts, Catherine adroitly blends the active with the contemplative, emphasizing her act of doing good works in the world as part of her spirituality. In Possible Lives: Authors and Saints in Renaissance Italy, Alison Knowles Frazier discusses how what is emphasized in Renaissance hagiography shifts from an other-worldly spirituality to a this-worldly spirituality, focused on a male vita activa and reforming manifestations of religious life outside the cloister and in the city. Figures like St. Thomas Aquinas, St. Ambrose, St. Potitus and St. Nicholas are profiled in particular, and the Latin humanist writers generally prefer the male subject to the female, with about 5% of Dominican accounts and 25% of Franciscan accounts being about women (Frazier 35). 
With a shift toward the active life in narratives of male religious, we cannot say that the blending of action with contemplation is entirely the domain of the female mystic. In fact, many women in the medieval and early modern periods would have been entirely precluded from having a “this-worldly” active life whether religious or not. Aristotle develops the crucial distinctions between zoe and bios, oikos and polis, limiting women to the realms of zoe (the biological life outside of politics) and oikos (the home), whereas men inhabit the domains of bios (the qualified life, the life of society, and political life) and polis (the city). Though there are some women who are societally sanctioned to engage in public life — like Mary Magdalene, Joan of Arc, Eleanor of Aquitaine, Vittoria Colonna — the vast majority of women through the Renaissance were unable to participate in the political life of the city, including those who claimed to have a higher divine impetus for doing so. In Women of the Renaissance, Margaret King notes that between the years of 1300 and 1700 “witches” in Italy outnumbered religious women 100 to 1, revealing that women who attempted to be viewed as religious and spread the word about their sanctity were much more frequently viewed to be demonic, an accusation that Catherine herself had even endured by some skeptics (described by Raymond as her “disparagers” (176-7)), though she is distinguished as a Church Doctor today (145).[8] Even earlier female mystics like Hildegard [q]of Bingen lead remarkable lives pursuing multivalent approaches to knowledge production and creative works, yet were proscribed from a public life outside the cloister apart from their letter writing endeavors. Though letter writing could be interpreted to be a subversive form of political engagement, and continues to be an important method of communication for later mystics and Catherine of Siena in particular, there is still a lack of public presence and public voice. Famously, a portion of Hildegard’s Scivias were read aloud by Pope Eugenius III to assembled clergy, revealing how even a medieval woman’s writing could participate in public performance, though the female voice of the writer is left unheard (Logan 175). 
Like Beauvoir’s description of the woman intellectual[r], the mystic or even religious woman is othered twice: first she is an outsider contained within zoe, secondly she is an outsider for being something that is “sacred.” In Roman law, t killed without the killer being he homo sacer is one who cannot be sacrificed yet can be condemned for homicide — those that are sacred belonging to the class of those who exist outside of society (Agamben 47). Priests, hermits, the sacrificial and the gods all exist outside of bios, outside of society and in a state of exclusion. Yet, all except God(s) are in some ways included in the form of exclusion — what Agamben describes as “the ambiguity of the sacred” — these sacred men are in some ways within and some ways without (50). Ambiguity consistently lies within the construction of the sacred, with overlapping between the holy and the unclean, for instance, which is an even more historically difficult line for women to negotiate. This being because the femina sacra, doubly without political life, is rendered twice removed. The “witches” killed throughout history for being part of this femina sacra classification suffered due to their twice-othered status, yet without any ramifications for those who killed them — in most cases the state. Though some very few feminae sacrae were fortunate enough to successfully escape death by the state, this may have been due to their amplified outsider status. As sacred women, they were completely outside the world of man, just like God,[9] and were therefore closer to the word of God, viewed more often as a conduit for God’s word in their mystical writing, than as a mediatrix channeling the logos.
As men were typically able to to express their religious authority through learning, citation, rhetoric and public engagement, they were not limited to the “prophetic, visionary, or mystical claims [that] were the primary modes of religious authorization available to women” (Hollywood “Gender, Agency” 514). On the figure of the male mystic, Lacan writes, “There are men who are just as good as women. It does happen. Despite, I won’t say their phallus, despite what encumbers them on that score, they get the idea, they sense there must be a jouissance which goes beyond. That is what we call a mystic” (“God and the Jouissance” 147 / S XX p. 76). Here, Lacan ties mysticism to bodily experience that is a painful pleasure (for him, beyond the phallus), an eroticism that could be said to be described frequently in mystical writing. Though corporality and perceived sexual difference are subjects touched upon by mystics, along with images of sensually felt divine love, there is also at play a complication of gender throughout many mystical and religious texts that suggest that there is an aspect of mysticism that goes beyond not just jouissance but also beyond a dichotomic gender binary. As Anne J. Cruz writes, “female mystics verbalize a uniquely Christocentric position that both transgresses and transcends gender order,” and I would add this to mystics in general, not just that male mystics participate in jouissance, but are equally inhabiting a complicated space that is both pushing at the boundaries and beyond the construction of gender[s] (134).
Running parallel yet divergent to the other creation stories of Genesis,[10] the book of the generations of Adam, Genesis 5, reads, “In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; male and female created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created[t]” (1-2). That is, from the beginning, male and female are part of Adam, and are also, presumably, part of God, as Adam is created in God’s image. This rings remarkably similar to Aristophanes’s creation tale of the three sexes as described in Plato’s Republic, except that in Genesis 5 there is only one sex comprised of both male and female identity. Perhaps, like the four-legged androgyne of Aristophanes, the female part of Adam was excised to form Eve, and we have since inherited a double-sexed notion of gender which was largely enforced in the Middle Ages and early modern period. Yet, from these early religious texts, there is enough scope for two genders to exist in one body, suggesting a complication of gender from the very creation stories that propagate the Judeo-Christian tradition. 
From a linguistic perspective, the situation of the soul is decidedly feminine as the Latin word “anima” is a feminine word. Thus, mystical writers like Jerome, Gregory of Nyssa, Thomas Aquinas (in Summa theologica as well as De anima) and Bernard of Clairvaux view the soul as intrinsically feminine. For those writing in the vernacular, Meister Eckhart uses the German feminine noun “Seele,” and Catherine and Teresa of Avila will adopt the feminine “a/ánima” in their native Italian and Spanish, respectively. Though linguistic gender may not seem particularly remarkable, it is worth noting that Bonaventure opts for the Latin masculine word “mens” (mind) rather than “anima,” and that Bernard of Clairvaux speaks of himself and his fellow monks in feminine terms throughout his writing, perhaps informed by the gendered language in addition to the hierarchical position of the worshipper who approaches the divine (Harmless 49, 85). Indeed, Bernard’s Sermons on the Song of Songs[u] speak to the malleability of the reader’s gender, as the presumably male reader must place himself in the position of the presumably female bride — allegorically the Church — to the presumably male bridegroom of Christ.[11] In this text, he describes being kissed on the mouth by Christ, and remarks on his female corporeality including breasts that swell with milk (2.2, 9.2, 9.7[v]).[12]
Famously, Bernard is also tied to breast milk due to his mystical vision known as Lactatio Bernardi in which the Virgin Mary intervenes on his behalf, perhaps to cure an eye infection, by either shooting her milk into his eyes, or dripping it into his mouth. In his chapter on “Bernard and Mary’s Milk,” Brian Patrick McGuire details a number of stories and visual art treatments that center around Bernard or another unnamed monk from Clairvaux, and James France notes that Bernard was not the only non-Christ figure suckling Mary’s milk as this became a “widespread theme in collections of Marian miracle stories” (McGuire 189-225, France 329). Interestingly, the monk is not only cured or aided, but also learns to be a great preacher through the milk,[13] and in one 13th-century source the holy fluid allowed the monk to obtain a “knowledge of letters.”[14] Here, the Virgin is regarded as a divine figure, not a mediatrix who intervenes on the male worshipper’s behalf to attain grace from the masculine divinity of the Father or the Son, and is able to also foster traditionally male knowledge of preaching and letters in the monk she blesses with her breast milk. This is certainly in line with the Cult of the Virgin popular through the Middle Ages and still arguably pursued in present-day Catholic tradition (especially in Latin America and the Philippines) which allowed for the persisted worship of the pre-Christian Earth Mother.[15] What is significant is that the Virgin, despite her status as mother and thus conscribed in a female body, still cultivates divine agency, which may be perceived to belong only to a masculine domain. The Virgin, having become pregnant and birthing a child miraculously, as well as being the only human after Christ’s death to have not suffered a bodily death,[16] reveals how the feminine can fit into the conception of the divine without becoming masculinized in some way. In her essay “Stabat Mater,” Julia Kristeva asks, “If it is not possible to say of a woman that she is..., would it perhaps be different concerning the mother, since that is the only function of the ‘other sex’ to which we can definitely attribute existence?” (161). If not knowing man sexually, as Eve did, somehow precludes her from some construct of the feminine, then the expression of motherhood with its pregnancy and bodily nourishment of the infant must call her back into that domain. 
That domain of motherhood, however, is not reserved for women. Christ is frequently a nurturer, who literally provides sustenance to his followers through his body and blood via transubstantiation during every Catholic mass. If one were to argue that corporeality and nourishing were exclusive to a feminine expression of spirituality, in Christ exists the clear exception. Caroline Walker Bynum discusses the parallelism between the Virgin’s breast and Christ’s wound, compellingly arguing the significance of the art historical record that positions Christ’s wound close to the breast is purposeful and telling.[17] Like Mary, too, and noted by Augustine, he is positioned as “Mediator of God and humanity, the man Jesus Christ,” existing simultaneously in the earthly and spiritual realms (1 Tim 2:5).[18] As the virgin son of God and woman, Christ is without a flesh and blood direct male ancestor, rendering him to be something of a gender outsider.[19] We must keep in mind that historically, blood has at times been gendered, as James White notes, “In medieval medical theory, blood was understood as the precursor to all other bodily fluids, including sperm and breast milk,” thus when Catherine equates the fragrance of her blood to that of Niccolò di Toldo,[20] she is suggesting that her blood is masculine rather than feminine (167). And for Christ, the opposite may well be true, as his human bloodlines are feminine, and as his blood is used in the production of a nourishing liquid. Catherine also constructs a “female Christ,” as F. Thomas Luongo has argued with regard to the language of Letter T273 that seems to reverse the traditional understanding of the Song of Songs, with Christ as the “sweet bride” who receives the masculine bridegroom soul in penetrative language (“Catherine of Siena: Rewriting the Female Holy Authority” 95-97).[21] Christ is in many ways tied to nourishing and motherhood and though he can be complicated as a feminine figure, he is still often cast as masculine and thus decidedly outside of the traditional realm inhabited by female. Roland Barthes suggests a new conception of the maternal: “Perhaps one should end up with this: ... no longer automatically confusing mother and woman. In which case, the androgyne would be any subject within whom there is something maternal” (194[w]). It is therefore necessary to claim the maternal as outside of woman, and fitting with a shifting, inconstant or outlying gender identification.
In Kristeva’s essay on the Virgin, she evokes not only milk but also tears as a non-verbal semiotics (174). While the milk is the symbol of nourishment, the mother’s tears are an expression of a sorrowful humanity; as a mother one is the symbol of life who also functions as the veil of inevitable death. However, again, it is not only women and mothers who cry — Abraham weeps out of mourning for Sarah in Genesis 23:2, David weeps occasionally in the Books of Samuel, Christ weeps in John 11:35 and Hebrews 5:7, Peter weeps bitterly after denying Christ in Matthew 26:75, Gregory the Great introduced the phrase “lacrymarum gratia” in his 6th-century Dialogues, sorrowful tears and the tears of his mother are a recurring motif in Augustine’s Confessions that factor into his conversion, tears were an important aspect of medieval monastic life for men,[22] and hagiographical records of Francis of Assisi note that his copious tears contributed to his eventually becoming blind. Arguably, each of these cases of tears are expressing sorrowful humanity, and are also spiritual utterances that are not constrained by corporeal states of sex, sexuality, or gender. The tears of men may not cause one to question their masculinity, but they do complicate the gendering of these emotional performances as ipso facto[x] feminine. Kristeva’s nonvocal semiotics of the mother can be extended to be part of a mystical semiotics that exist outside of speech and written word (as in Francis’s case), but should not be limited in its conscription to the domain of womanhood, as mothering and its expressions are not bound to a singular gender.
The figure of the virgin, who is determinedly outside of sexuality, and typically does not participate in the expression of motherhood as in Kristeva’s discussion of Mary, is even less easily gendered. Though the Scivias, an illustrated account of her mystical visions (12th century), Hildegard puts forth that married sexual life can be a fine choice for a Christian when done with care, the corporeal state of virginity would always be preferable. Throughout her writing, she conflates “virginitas” with “viriditas” (greenness) and “virilitas” (virility) — for Hildegard and her contemporaries, words were valid signifiers for that which they signified. Thus, the virgin is a green and ripening fruit that pulls its power from the sun, rendering greenness to be a vital force that can be easily reconciled with the notion of virility. With these similarities in mind, both male and female “green” virgins prove to be not only virile, but the most virile of humans as virginity has more viridity (thus virility) integral to it than any other state of being. Indeed, in her Symphonia, Hildegard refers to the Virgin Mary as “viridissima virga” (no. 19) and Saint Rupert of Bingen as “dulcis viriditas pomis” (no. 49, 4a), while also emphasizing his position as a “vas nobile / quod non est pollutum” (no. 49, 4b). Though Maud Burnett McInerney argues that Hildegard represents Rupert through a “feminization of his body,” it seems to me that Hildegard is actually working to position the virgin within a separate class in and of itself (149). That is, the greenness that Hildegard describes is not in some way aligned with femininity, or even masculinity despite its connection to virility, but exists as an especially virile condition that is amplified for having been taken out of a sexual economy and gender. 
The figures of the mystic as well as the saint, whether virgin or not, are also in many ways beyond gender, just as they remain as individuals outside of the political life of society. Employing shifting subjectivity throughout her text Das fliessende Licht the beguine mystic Mechthild of Magdeburg has the allegorical Lady Knowledge instruct the soul: “You are a virile man in battle, a well-dressed virgin in the palace before your Lord, and a joyous bride in your bed with God”[23] (II.19). That is, the figure of the mystic is man, virgin and bride all at once — alternately courageous and pugnacious, courtly, ecstatic. With all of the recasting of gender in Song of Songs by religious thinkers, it is interesting to consider that in the Legenda aurea, Jacobus de Voragine describes Saint Sebastian as the saddle in between Christ-the-horseman and Church-the-horse. Though Sebastian has recently become an iconic saint for the LGBTQ community due to frequent homoerotic paintings of his martyrdom throughout art history,[24] Voragine was likely not consciously depicting Sebastian as inhabiting a third gender between the presumably masculine Christ and presumably feminine Church, though the imagery is decidedly sexual. Not only does Voragine evoke the Song of Songs,[25] but horseback riding as well, which was typically understood to be a metaphor for sexual relations throughout the medieval period.[26] In occupying the space between the masculine and the feminine, as the saddle between horse and rider, Sebastian can skillfully negotiate both spaces, or else be entirely outside either. Famously penetrated by all those arrows as one of his trials of martyrdom, Sebastian can occupy the positionality of the sexual female, while simultaneously holding military rank, which was traditionally reserved for the masculine domain. Though not described as a mystic, throughout his saintly life, Sebastian exemplifies the complicated gendering of the religious figure, which is even more problematized with the religious figure is also engaging with mysticism. 
Mystics in particular reject many of the traditional and typically masculine forms of Christian worship: the desert fathers and mothers rejected all societal and gendered context by separating themselves from it, cloistered and anchorite mystics separated themselves from society at large and the gender binary more specifically, and itinerant mystics like Catherine chose to live unconventional lives that were unattached to norms imposed by gender roles. As Bonaventure writes, the Franciscans prayed not on ecclesiastical books and did not chant the canonical hours, but prayed humbly to the Cross of Christ and on all things, suggesting that they were not interested in praying in a learned and erudite manner (which would have been limited to male Christians at the time) (IV, 3). Further, Bonaventure explains how the Franciscans believed that to achieve grace, one should renounce the wisdom of the world as well as his knowledge of letters, and thus dispossessed of such inheritance to go naked to the Lord (VII, 2). This teaching, which is certainly in keeping with Francis’s own biographical experience of renouncing his earthly possessions and law profession by rendering himself naked in a piazza of Assisi,[27] rings true for all mystics — without the accoutrements of clothing and societal performance, these figures are without gender, class or societal status, but a homo sacer. 
Many mystics — more than denying themselves clothes, educational capital, belongings, and manneristic performance — tried to deny themselves of their body as well. Though Caroline Walker Bynum and Rudolph M. Bell discuss the many holy women who denied themselves food,[28] and the fasting Catherine would also limit her sleep to half an hour out of every period of two days, bodily denial was not limited to feminine spiritual practices. Hair shirts and flagellation were typical expressions of corporeal mortification and suffering across gender, whether to prevent sexual urges or in an attempt to no longer feel the body at all. In addition to sleeping on hard surfaces and a diet devoid of meat and cooked vegetables, in one hagiographic episode, Francis flees to the cold snow outside to dispel his desires. Writing on Spanish mystics including Juan de los Ángeles and John of the Cross, Maureen Flynn explains how negating the temporally-bound body proved to be a means to fully incorporate the soul more purely with God, allowing the individual’s core of the immortal soul to rid itself of sensory and mental faculties to transcend (“The Spiritual Uses of Pain in Spanish Mysticism”). This is to say, that even if we do not follow Judith Butler’s view that sex is just as much of a construction as gender is, these practices show that not only are mystics divorcing themselves from gender but they are trying to remove themselves from their body as well: going naked to the Lord means ridding oneself not just of clothes but of the body as well. Mystics are working to exist on the Earth just as they eventually will in Paradise, as genderless, sexless, body-less immortal creatures of God. 
Although religious and holy figures engage with many of the same negotiations of sex, gender, and social status that mystics do, the mystic is in a special situation due to her[y] direct access to God. As Helen Rolfson writes (128):
The mystic speaks of God as of the partner in dialogue. What is said about one is reflected mirror-wise in the other ... The prayers of Catherine of Siena beautifully demonstrate this reciprocity … As William of St. Thierry puts it: “True friendship either finds or creates equals.” No friendship is based on inequality. The mystic is very aware that that offer of divine friendship has been extended to one who is anything but God’s equal. 
Though the mystic does not perceive herself to be the equal to God, she sees herself to be a partner and a friend, which is a condition that approaches God unlike any other state of being. The unique relationship between mystic and God is often viewed as one in which the mystic serves as a conduit for God’s word, but, as Rolfson explains, it proves to be more of a working and reciprocal partnership. And indeed, as Barbara Newman explains, often the mystic forgets the difference between the creature and the Creator, and “behaves as an equal” (144). Within this practice, the mystic’s conversations with God and the resulting writing that documents these dialogues act as another space in which the mystic acts to mediate. The mystic channels God’s direct teaching, filters it through her experience and knowledge, and then releases it as a means to teach and nurture others. The language, as we will explore, is bound by earthly literary conventions and reveals the agency that the mystic has in her relationship to God’s word. 
        More than a partnership, of course, is the union with God that all religious followers experience to some degree, but which mystics more palpably participate in, through mystical marriages and spiritual transpositions. Catherine of Siena marries Christ, exchanges her  corporeal heart with his, wears his foreskin for a ring,[29] relates how her name is interchanged with Christ’s by Niccolò di Toldo,[30] and carries out God’s work in public spaces throughout her life. She is not alone, as Catherine of Alexandria, Teresa of Avila, Rose of Lima, Francisco de Hoyos y Sena[z], and many others also experienced a mystical wedding, and still more wrote prayers and sermons on marriage with Christ.[31] Similarly, others take the place of Christ in certain instances: the martyrs suffer and sacrifice themselves as Christ did, Bernard of Clairvaux drinks Mary’s milk in the place of the infant Jesus, Margaret and other saints literally and allegorically beat the devil as God does in the Bible. Origen adimantios writes on the role of the soul as a mother to Jesus “And every soul, virgin and uncorrupted, which conceives by the Holy Spirit, so as to give birth to the Will of the Father, is the Mother of Jesus,” emphasizing the constantly in-flux relationships between Mary and Christ, the soul and Mary, and the soul and Christ (Comm. on Mt. frg. 281 [GCS Origen 12.1:126.10-15]).[32] In remarking particularly of a pure soul, that is virginal and uncorrupted, Origen is limiting his pool of Christian followers dramatically, and speaks to the complicated role of the Virgin Mary, and the concept of the virgin as a figure that is on the peripheries of gender and in conflict with itself in many ways — at once a virgin and a mother. Moreover, Teresa of Ávila notes in her writing that she lived only through God being within her,[33] the missionary mystical writer Luisa de Carvajal y Mendoza appropriates Christ’s voice, and Angela de Foligno identified with Christ throughout her writing (Cruz 133-136). In many ways the mystic is not only married with God, but entrenched with him, and more often with the Son of God, Christ, specifically, exchanging body parts, voices, and positions with him. 
The union with God, whether it is perceived as the result of a mystical marriage or not, leads to another positionality that is difficult to locate. Jacopone da Todi writes of the union with God as a loss of self, tempering it paradoxically with some semblance of maintained subjectivity on the part of the soul who is both conquering and conquered: “The form that has been given you by God has absorbed you in such a way that you live although you are dead, both conqueror and conquered” (Laud 91, as quoted in The Flowering of Mysticism 130). Hadewijch[aa] uses similar contradictory language of the union between the mortal soul and the divine in a letter (Letter IX)[34], 
From the depths of his wisdom, he shall teach you what he is and with what wonderful sweetness the one lover lives in the other and so permeates the other that they do not know themselves from each other. But they possess each other in mutual delight, mouth in mouth, heart in heart, body in body, soul in soul, while a single divine nature flows through them both and they both become one through each other, yet remaining always themselves.
In this description, there is a knowledge that is cultivated through the union — not a knowledge of letters (though one may gain that from Mary’s breast milk), but a certain sweet and spiritual wisdom. Hadewijch blends imagery from the Song of Songs with more equitable ideas about marriage than what may have been available at the time of her writing: two lovers who are one yet maintain their own identity. Quoting William of St. Thierry, Bernard McGinn writes, “The mystical life consists of an ongoing oscillation between [ ... ] two stages — ‘...the man of God ought to be always either rational in seeking or spiritual in loving’” (The Growth of Mysticism 235). The “man” of God is always finding himself in a fluctuating position, shifting between not just two stages of rationality (an earthly state) and spirituality, but constantly negotiating among many different registers that are coded as human, divine and other. Like the recluses of Siena in the 13th and 14th centuries, the mystic is on the peripheries of the city, at its edges like the homo sacer. 
        [Paragraph leading this into queer theory -- explain the theorists, provide a definition, or put it into play with Catherine’s writing
        The mystic is a borderless figure, gendered queer and an amalgamation between nature and divine, fluctuating between a this-worldly direction and an other-worldly focus. Like the Latin American figure of Santa Muerte, a skeleton saint who travels beyond borders with migrants who carry her and is considered to be at once folkloristic and holy, the mystics operate within a similar space: by being sacred they are othered. Nomadic, whether by being an earthly itinerant preacher or a divinely transcendent anchorite, the mystic passes through borders freely yet is bound by them, and persists as a figure of tension that holds “incompatible things together because both or all are necessary and true,” paradoxically shifting between rational language and erotically charged spiritual language, the sense of being nothing and everything at once in union with, yet separate from God (Haraway 161). In her “Manifesto,” Donna Haraway writes, “Cyborgs might consider more seriously the partial, fluid, sometimes aspect of sex and sexual embodiment,” and, moreover, the queer cybernetic mystic might consider the partial, fluid, and sometimes-state of mortality and immortality, human and non-human (as they approach divinity), within and without (180). A paradoxical figure, the mystic, like the texts that she leaves behind, operates within the periphery: between and among, folklore and canon, erudite and wise yet uneducated and sensing.
Returning to Freud’s claim that “Mysticism is the obscure self-perception of the realm outside the ego, of the id,” and considering that the id also dominates psychological development prior to the phallic stage of sexual awareness and gender expression, it is possible to see how mystics are working outside of a sexual economy, outside of gender, and outside of typically human forms of consciousness. In her lyrical text, Teresa, My Love, on the mystic Teresa of Àvila, Kristeva really gets to the heart of the situation of the mystic (26):
Hail Teresa, borderless woman, … made word, made flesh, who unravels inside and outside herself, ... too much body yet disembodied, beyond matter, ... throbbing for the Beloved ever-present and yet never there, ... His in her, hers in Him, ... La Madre being the most virile of monks, most canny of the herders of souls, a veritable twin of Christ, she is He, He is she, the Truth is me, or Him in the deepest part of me, me Teresa…
The mystic is a conflation of so many seemingly contradictory yet in flux states of being. Despite these multivalent experiential states, there is an interest in self-construction among mystics that is beyond the constraints of society in general, and instead approaches a transcendent state of being that is yet still operating within temporal language and space. In this way, the mystic is within and without, straddling the border between the active and contemplative, the masculine and feminine, the earthly and the divine — and serving as a bridge that complicates these boundaries and fuses them together.  
Courtly Love
  
  

Word Cloud Visualization, Catherine’s Dialogo on left, Dante’s Paradiso on right
 See Appendix for full interactive tools


Franco Moretti, in theorizing world literature and arguing against canon-based close reading, makes a case for “distant reading:” “where distance, let me repeat it, is a condition of knowledge: it allows you to focus on units that are much smaller or much larger than the text: devices, themes, tropes — or genres and systems” (49). If we are to recover missing voices from the canon, who have been overlooked due to their marginalized status (be that due to gender, race, religion, economic status, etc.), it becomes imperative to employ new methods of entering analytical and theoretical discourse. Utilizing a quantitative approach enabled through statistical computations through the digital humanities, can allow readers to look at Catherine’s texts in light of her fellow Italian vernacular innovators that are within the literary canon. 


The mystics, master practitioners of shifting subjectivities, are not alone in this impulse. The writers of courtly love poetry also negotiate their relative subjectivity and objectivity in relation to their lover. Using amorous and erotic language to do so, they simultaneously contemplate virtue and the loss of self, just as mystic writers do. Though theorists like Beauvoir have argued that mystics, inherently feminine, have been informed by their experience of love and love poetry because they have not been able to function within another domain, here I would like to suggest that there is an exchange—not a one-directional influence—between mystic writing and love poetry. Love poetry generally borrows language from religious writing (the loved lady as the Sun, for example), but is typically thought to eroticize the religious language; and some have argued that the Song of Songs is the solitary gateway for religious and erotic language to mingle together. But mystical writing, while also informed by the Song of Songs, has had a long-standing tradition of erotically-charged language used as a means to access knowledge in general and sacred knowledge in particular. The tradition of love poetry that comes out of courtly love, and of which I will consider Catherine’s fellow Italian vernacular writers, similarly uses erotic language as an avenue to knowledge of love, knowledge of metaphysics (as with Guido Cavalcanti), and knowledge of God.
In the chapter “Vernacular Voices of the Donna: Pisa” in Reclaiming Catherine of Siena, Jane Tylus writes of the significance of the Italian preference for the courtly word donna rather than the more biological femmina for “woman,” which persists to this day, no doubt because of Dante’s usage though he is not the first to use the word in love poetry addressed to the lady. Catherine herself makes the distinction between the two words: femmina as weak, donna as cultivating strength and will. Donna, derived from the Latin word domina, is the feminine noun counterpart to Domine, a word for God. In literal terms, domine is lord and donna is lady, with all the undertones of King Arthur’s court. As Tylus argues, the word lady is not typically employed more than woman in other languages, for example, the French preferring femme over dame. Though it is interesting that Dante’s diction has been so compelling and influential to the Italian language over time, the use of donna in courtly love poetry reveals the play with subjectivity inherent in these texts. By instilling so much force in the word used for the beloved, granting her a domain and a queendom regardless of her social status—even perhaps suggestive a feminine god—the masculine lover-speaker mitigates his own power in linguistic terms, often of course significant to the meaning of the poetry.
There has certainly been a lot of feminist criticism around troubadour poetry and the subsequent courtly love poetry that developed in the Italian language first in the Sicilian court of Frederick II (the Sicilian School), then through to the Tuscan School and Dante’s own cohort of the dolce stil novo. Though it can be argued that the elevated position of the female beloved in relation to the male pursuer can be seen as progressive, even patronizing, it is also possible to read the texts not as a binary representation of a masculine knight-errant pursuing an inaccessible feminine lover, but as a negotiation of several power hierarchies in an amorous relationship. For each poet, these dynamics play out differently, and in poetry cycles much can be shifted. While Beatrice is known to be the virtuous and lofty unattainable woman in Dante’s love poetry, Dante also presents a very different woman and very different speaker-lover in his Rime petrose cycle. “La crudele.” Here the stone woman may be the more powerful one in the relationship, as Dante also does depict Beatrice, but the Donna Pietra is not virtuous and seems to be the aggressor who overtakes the fleeing speaker-lover. In the last of the four poems, “Così nel mio parlar voglio esser aspro,” rape imagery and the notion of eros as revenge are intersected with imagery of the liturgical hours (66-73): 
S’io avessi le belle trecce prese,
che fatte son per me scudiscio e ferza,
pigliandole anzi terza,
con essere passerei vespero e squille:
e non sarei pietoso né cortese,
anzi farei com’orso quando scerza;
e se Amor me ne sferza,
io mi vendicherei di più di mille. [35]
The imagery of the bear is from an old proverb: if you don't want to get bitten, don't play with a bear. Here the speaker-lover expects a violent sex act on the part of both parties. The church bells show the passage of night, but they also lend a sacred sense to the representation, especially considering that Dante brings imagery from this poem into Paradiso XXVI (discussed below).
Before delving further into the courtly love poetry, let us consider the Beguine mystic writing that Barbara Newman describes as “la mystique courtoise.” She argues that Beguine mystical writers — Hadewijch, Mechthild, Marguerite Porete — experiment with polyvalent subjectivity, sometimes as the beloved bride of Christ the bridegroom and sometimes as the knight-errant longing for his/her faraway beloved. Hadewijch, for example, twins “I” and “she” in her lyric poetry, “indistinguishable from the troubadour’s,” and even pretends to abandon love and spurn her beloved, which “only initiates will recognize … as God” (148). Beguine mysticism adopted both the monastic allegorical tradition surrounding the Song of Songs as well as a courtly love tradition: “In combination, the two discourses may reinforce each other or they may work at cross-purposes, almost incidentally conferring dual gender on both the lover and the divine Beloved” (138). I would add that it is not just the mystics who are combining the two threads of Song of Songs subjectivity-shifting monasticism and courtly love, for how else can Dante bring erotic language into Paradiso?
Even in the writing of the poet considered the most secular of the dolce stil novo group, Guido Cavalcanti, donna (again, related to domine) is employed throughout his poetry (the famous “Donna me prega” is considered here in particular), displacing power from the masculine speaker to the feminine beloved. Unlike some of his contemporary poets, Cavalcanti’s beloved is not depicted as cruel, stingy with her love, nor is she in any way punished for her power over him; instead he is a willing servant to her and happy to suffer for his love. This resembles the mystic’s relation to God, as the mystic is always full of love and ready to serve her lord. As Dana Stewart explains, the donna is equipped with the Platonic model of active eyes, while the speaker has the Aristotelian model of passive eyes (49). The words for eyes (occhi) and other vision-based words including light (lume), are used throughout love poetry and mystical writing; Cavalcanti, who writes in a very philosophical manner, uses these terms as they relate to the science of optics, as he was aware of it in his time. In discussing Cavalcanti within the theoretical cinematic model of the male gaze, Stewart writes, “The poet-lover exerts no controlling gaze over her [his beloved],” revealing his relative subordinance to the beloved (54). Intellectually, as will be discussed below, Cavalcanti is unable to grasp the image of his beloved, which further demonstrates his lack of power in relation to the woman who exists in an ineffable state.
In both mystical and courtly love writing, shifting subjectivities are constantly in flux, as they are in Catherine’s writing. While Beguine mystics may often operate within a traditional role reversal with Christ as love object, Dante and other Italian poets depict throughout their texts a negotiation between the one who is the beloved and the lover. Catherine transposes relations so that she is the one that God is after instead, as can be seen in the Dialogo as well as her Orazioni: 
...o pazzo d’amore! Hai tu bisogno della tua creatura? Sì, a quanto mi pare; parché tu tieni dei modi, come se tu non potessi vivere senza di lei, sabbene tu sia vita, da cui ogni cosa ha vita, e senza di te nessuna cosa vive. Perché dunque sei così impazzito? Perché tu tinnamorasti della tua fattura, ti compiacesti e dilettasti in te medesimo di lei, e, come inebriato della sua salute, la vai cercando, mentre ella ti fugge? Ella si allontana, e tu ti appressi a lei; non potevi venire più vicino, che vestendoti della sua umanità (Dialogo 153).[36]


O amore ineffabile, benché nella tua luce tu vedessi tutte le iniquità che la tua creatura doveva commettere contro la tua infinita bontà, tu hai come fatto finta di non vedere, e hai fermato lo sguardo sulla bellezza della tua creatura, della quale tu, come pazzo ed ebbro d’amore, ti sei innamorato, e per amore l’hai tratta da te dandole l’essere a tua immagine e somiglianza. Tu, verità eterna, hai dichiarato a me la tua verità, cioè che è stato l’amore a costringerti a crearla; benché tu vedessi che ti doveva offendere, la tua carità non ha voluto che tu fermassi l’occhio in questo vedere, ma al contrario hai distolto i tuoi occhi da questa offesa che doveva avvenire e li hai fermati sulla bellezza della creatura. Se tu avessi fermato lo sguardo in quell’offesa, avresti dimenticato l’amore che avevi per creare l’uomo. E non ti fu nascosto questo, ma ti sei fermato all’amore, perché tu non sei altro che fuoco d’amore, pazzo della tua creatura  (Orazione 4).[37]
Catherine depicts God as a sort of Pygmalion figure in love with his creation — not only in love, but madly and drunkenly and crazily in love[38] with her (Catherine uses creatura, a feminine noun, but she also refers to his creation as uomo). She talks about love as ineffable, a metaphor for self knowledge, and also of his beloved straying from the pursuing love, an allegory of the sinning human escaping God. She discusses God becoming man in Christ, and how that resolves some of the lovers’ tension, though man will always be expected to sin. The prayer in particular speaks to God’s not giving up on his creation—the errant knight who ceaselessly pursues his beloved.
Love poetry is often thought of as an exchange between two individuals, or even just the solitary writing of one party to another disinterested one (as the act of writing itself is often conflated with working alone). However courtly love poetry is inherently part of a larger community: the court. As Newman explains, the amorous couple are never truly alone and are alway enveloped by friends, foes, or jealous members of the court. She writes (142),
A fulfilled relationship could overcome the solipsism of immature lovers and blossom into what Chrétien de Troyes called the Joy of the Court. In his Erec et Énide, high festival is held when mature lovers also achieve the integration of private desire with social responsibility. 
That is, there is an assimilation of the private to the public within courtly love, which is also a topos for the mystic; this Newman demonstrates in her discussion of the Beguine mystic in particular. The mystic is surrounded by spiritual friends and is often in the position of sharing her bridegroom of Christ with them. In states of ecstasy, the mystic is often with others, dictating her experience to scribes, thus making a very private and erotic affair an aspect of the wider spiritual community of which she is part. While some cloistered or otherwise reclusive mystics, like Hildegard, are members of a much smaller community (though certainly still a community nonetheless), mystics like Catherine who are part of society invariably have social responsibility as a larger aspect of their mysticism and love with Christ. Therefore, in a figure like Catherine, the topos of community within courtly love is particularly strong, and she must not consider just herself and her lover alone but all the societal implications as an aspect of her mystical experiences and writing.
A typical component of courtly love is the giving of gifts and their joyful reception by the lady. Though generally the gifts that Christ and God bestow upon the mystics are the virtues (charity, chastity), or tribulations such as poverty and illness,[39] Catherine (and a few other women who experienced mystical marriages with Christ) did receive a ruby ring from her beloved. A jewel, visible only to herself, is in much stricter keeping with courtly love motifs and plotlines. Further, the exchange of hearts between lovers is the utmost expression of passion in courtly love poetry, and though this is usually expressed in metaphorical terms, with one of the two parties expressing to the other that they have full control over the other’s heart, in mysticism this exchange of hearts can be quite literal. According to Raymond, Catherine herself exchanged hearts with Christ, with her heart beating inside his body and Christ’s heart contained within her body for three days. Heather Webb notes that this exchange is not depicted within Catherine’s own writing,[40] but another example of literal heart exchange is also present in the mystic writing of Lutgardis in the early 13th century. Though the motif of jewel exchange may occupy a literal space in courtly love poetry but a figurative position in mystic writing, the aspect of community is in many ways heightened within mystical writing and the exchange of hearts rendered in very literal terms.
Another aspect of courtly love is the unattainable beloved, generally the unattainable lady. For troubadours, and in courtly cycles like that of Lancelot and Guinevere, the unattainable beloved is typically a woman socially elevated above the pursuing lover-errant, or, worse yet, a married woman (often the queen). This could often be couched in language that was not offensive to the noble man married to the woman, and often invoked the exemplary virtue of the lady, who was often thought to be noble in class and honor. As courtly love poetry removed itself from the court (as in the Tuscan School and the subsequent dolce stil novo), the topos of the beloved queen began to be effaced from the literature, but the sense of the lady’s praiseworthiness was not diminished. The 13th-century poet, Guido Guinizzelli, exemplifies the virtuous nature of the beloved in his lyric poem, “Io voglio del ver la mia donna laudare,” in which the speaker explains that the all whom the lady greets loses their pride (“ch’abassa orgoglio a cui dona salute” (10)), and that no one can have bad thoughts when they behold her. The speaker, for his part, grows to be more virtuous, as well (12-14):
e no·lle pò apressare om che sia vile;
ancor ve dirò c’ha maggior vertute:
null’ om pò mal pensar fin che la vede.[41]
Similarly, in his lyric “Tanto gentile” from the Vita nova, Dante remarks on how the lady is dressed in humility (“benignamente d’umilità vestuta (6)), and how she seems to have been sent to Earth from Heaven: “e par che sia una cosa venuta / da cielo in terra a miracol mostrare” (7-8).[42] This construction — someone to love sent from Paradise to perform miracles within human society — is markedly similar to another who is beloved: Christ.
Thus, more than an Earthly queen, the true ultimate expression of the inaccessible beloved is one who is in Heaven, and both Dante and Petrarch employed this solution in their post-mortem figures of Beatrice and Laura respectively. While both ladies are considered to be within the kingdom of Paradise, and therefore within the general milieu of the court, for Dante in particular the figure of Beatrice, so virtuous and beatific, can be mapped onto the beloved of the mystic: Christ. The unattainable beloved is not only a woman of a higher class, but of nobler virtue, and the good lady serves to elevate her extolling lover to a higher plane. Christ, too, works this way for believers on earth, and the mystics address this aspect of Christ. In a Letter to Queen Elizabeth of Hungary, Catherine writes (T145):
Quale cuore si potrebbe tenere che non scoppiasse d’amore a ragguardare questo dolce e saporoso frutto, cioè il dolce e buono Gesù? il quale Dio Padre ha dato per sposo alla santa Chiesa. Dobbiamo dunque correre come innamorati, ed essere amatori della Chiesa santa per lo amore di Cristo crocifisso.[43] 
Upon seeing the bridegroom Christ, any Christian should be compelled to action, running to the Church, overwhelmed with goodness. As an unattainable (until death) beloved who also compels his lover to make himself or herself more virtuous, Christ is the ultimate object of courtly love devotion.
Guido Cavalcanti, whose work is among the least spiritually-inclined of the dolce stil novo poets, also notes how the virtue of his lady elevates the speaker-lover; she is like a divine goddess in his lyric poem of praise “Chi è questa che vèn, ch’ogn’om la mira” (9-14):
Non si poria contar la sua piagenza,
ch’a le’ s’inchin’ ogni gentil vertute,
e la beltate per sua dea la mostra.
Non fu sì alta già la mente nostra
e non si pose in noi tanta salute,
che propriamente n’aviam canoscenza.[44]
For Cavalcanti, the intellectual nobility may be higher than an orientation to the divine, but the same premise stands, as the beloved’s graciousness elevates the lover. Here Cavalcanti brings to bear another element that intersects with virtue: the ineffability that comes when the lover attempts to understand the lady’s goodness. The speaker cannot even fully describe her beauty (how pleasing she is), and when he tries to fathom her he explains that he is incapable of doing so within his own limitations. This inability to comprehend is echoed in the longer poem “Donna me prega,” which also considers the optics as discussed above. On this, Stewart writes, “...when he does speak of his perceptual appropriation of her, he emphasizes that his mind cannot fully grasp her image,” which suggests that it is not just the virtues of the lady that are ineffable, but her entire being and all that she represents (53). The inability lies not just in understanding the beloved, but in not understanding love and the virtues of love as an abstract concept.
This language is also consistent with religious language about God and self-knowledge, and Dante’s words as he progresses through Paradise, which begins in Canto I (“Nel ciel che più de la sua luce prende / fu’ io, e vidi cose che ridire / né sa né può chi di là sù discende”[45] (4-6)) and culminates in Canto XXXIII: “per tal modo / che ciò ch’i’ dico è un semplice lume,”[46] “credo ch’i’ vidi,”[47] “Omai sarà più corta mia favella, / pur a quel ch’io ricordo, che d’un fante / che bagni ancor la lingua a la mammella”[48] (89-90, 92, 106-108). Dante, as he travels through Heaven, believes that he forgets, can only speak of what he saw in rudimentary language, can only attest to what he believes he saw, and ultimately sees how incapable he is at describing what he has seen. Divine love, for poets and mystics alike, is outside of the capacity of human expression. As in Orazione 4 above, Catherine describes love as “ineffabile,” and God and Love can be considered to be one and the same. Throughout her Dialogo, she uses variants of the word “ineffabile” 30 times over its 167 chapters, pairing it with variants of “amore” or “amare” 80% of the time (in 24 instances). In chapter 96, Catherine writes of the limitation of speech in describing union with God:
Qual lingua potrebbe narrare l’eccellenza di questo ultimo stato unitivo, e i frutti diversi e svariati che in esso si ricevono, essendo riempite le tre potenza dell’anima? … E così via discorrendo, tutti ve l’hanno manifestata, chi per un modo e chi per un altro. Ma non potresti mai narrare l’intrinseco sentimento, l’ineffabile dolcezza e l’unione perfetta con me, con la tua lingua che è cosa finita.[49]
Catherine evokes the finiteness of the tongue’s capabilities at odds with the infinite quality of love and the divine. While she explains that doctors of the Church have revealed the glorious light through the Holy Scripture, this writing is also limited because love cannot be described until one experiences it. Although both Dante and Catherine suggest that the experience of divine love is not outside of human capacity, putting this experience into words seems beyond the human. This translates to the mystic or to other religious figure unable fully to understand the mechanisms of God’s love. The mystic is a participant of this infinite love, but not the originator of it, and she cannot render that aspect of love to others in human language. Despite being unable to produce divine love, the mystic remains a devoted servant to her lover just the same, steadfast and firm in her love.
This love is an overwhelming love; it overtakes the lover. In a letter to the Dominican Bartolomeo Dominici, Catherine suggests that this love, where the self is completely eradicated, is the ultimate expression of love: 
con desiderio di vedervi tanto annegato e affocato in Cristo Gesù, che al tutto vi perdiate voi medesimo. Ma questo non veggo che potiate avere se l'occhio dell'intelletto del vero desiderio non si leva sopra di voi a ragguardare l'occhio ineffabile della divina carità col quale Dio ragguardò (e ragguarda) la sua creatura, prima che ci creasse.[50] 
The negation of self, enflamed in his love, can only be achieved when the intellectual eye rises to look into the ineffable eye of divine charity. Again, we see the trope of the unexplainable, with the eye of divine charity that cannot be described. This all-encompassing love is similarly a common trope in courtly love poetry, as exemplified in 13-century poet Guido delle Colonne’s lyric “Amor, che lungiamente m’ai menato,” as he discusses being ridden by love against his will, citing Virgil’s “Amor che vince tutto” (24) among his arguments. Like Catherine’s depiction of the “pazzo d’amore” and feelings of drunkenness and madness while experiencing love, Guido also speaks to this loss of rational self (53-55):
Amor fa disviare li più sagi,
e chi più ama e pena à in sè misura;
più folle è quello che più si ‘nnamura.[51]
The idea of measure in courtly poetry expresses the Aristotelian idea of the mean, and how one should conduct oneself with constancy. However, as Guido writes in this poem, love unravels these systems to render the wise incapable of competing with the force of love. For Guido, this may be considered contrary to human order, but as Catherine continues in her letter, this is how one must approach God, who is also a mad lover, “La quale poiché ragguardò in sé medesimo, innamorossene smisuratamente; tanto che per amore ci creò, volendo che noi godessimo e participassimo quello bene che aveva in sé medesimo” (T204).[52] In courtly love this reciprocity between equal lovers is often not exemplified in this way for it operates outside the hierarchies of the human court, but as love poetry is blended with spirituality by Dante, he navigates “l'amor che move il sole e l'altre stelle.”
Working throughout the Commedia, Dante blends previous works into his more religiously-minded epic. Many have argued that these examples are palinode employed to distance his current work from earlier writing that was not as spiritually informed as his opus would prove to be. An example of this is in Canto II of Inferno, where Francesca and Paolo are damned for their amorous love that arose from reading about courtly love. Sara Sturm-Maddox also discusses the connection between the Rime petrose and Purgatorio, particularly with the figure of the Medusa, and how Dante must rid himself of this former life in order to pass into the Earthly Paradise.[53] However, Dante does not purge himself of courtly or erotic language altogether, and even uses the imagery of love’s teeth biting him in both his Rime petrose and in Canto XXVI of Paradiso:
Io mio penser di fuor sì che si scopra,
ch’io non fo de la morte, che ogni sense
co li denti d’Amor già mi manduca[54]


Ma dì ancor se tu senti altre corde
tirarti verso lui, sì che tu suone
con quanti denti questio amor ti morde[55]
Although this is not a direct citation, the image of love’s teeth biting him cannot be a coincidence, and the repetition of sense and thought in the surrounding context deepens that connection. Dante, then, does not see courtly and erotic love as outside of a divine context and, given that Dante is approved by the blessed in this Canto, he must not believe that there is an incongruity between amorous love and love for God. This incomplete departure suggests a rhetoric of courtly love consistent and compatible with a mystical discourse.
Arguing in her essay, “The Sexual Body in Dante’s Celestial Paradise,” that Dante co-opts courtly and erotic language throughout Paradiso, F. Regina Psaki emphasizes that in Paradise the soul is not actually without body, as after the Revelation souls will be joined with their bodies once again. Instead, she views erotic, embodied love as a site of redemption. Noting the innovative language of Dante, including neologism, she writes, “The colonization of the language of courtship, caress, intercourse, and orgasm as components of divine bliss would have struck a contemporary reader not because it was unprecedented, but precisely because it is not deployed in familiar fashion as simply a figure for the love which joins risen mankind and God” (57). Though I do not at all hope to diminish Dante’s ingenious and masterful use of language ripe with poetic force and meaning, I would like to suggest that his words that relate to corporeal and erotic romance, intercourse and orgasm were already a part of mystical writing, not just in the writing of the Beguine mystics, but also in Italian (Clare of Assisi and Angela of Foligno predate the writing of the Commedia), and that they would persist after his writing. We cannot be sure that Dante was reading mystical writing, bug it is unlikely that his contemporary reader would be as struck by the conflation of eroticism and redemption as a reader of the 21st century may well be, for spirituality for us seems loosened from the passionate love so embedded in late medieval writing. I would only like to suggest that the language of the mystic would have been circulating in the broader Italian culture and that the very erotic nature of texts that treat the divine, such as Dante’s courtly love epic, would likely be in dialogue with these texts. 
Petrarch, the other towering poet of the Italian 14th century, works in a more introspective manner than many of the poets that precede him. In describing Dante’s approach to poetry, Giuseppe Mazzotta argues that Dante is on a quest for “visionary poetry that would bind together various strands of experience against the partitions and fragmentations engendered by critical, analytical thinking,” whereas Petrarch views poetry “as the act by which fame is acquired and death is conquered” (12). Indeed, Petrarch’s conception of poetry can be perceived as a departure from the spiritually-minded work of his predecessor Dante, but ultimately they are both working with the idea of everlasting life. Petrarch, like his contemporary Catherine, travelled throughout Italy and to Provence, an itinerant poet. He wrote the poetry of his Rerum vulgarium fragmenta[56] over 40 years and continued to reorder the work, dealing more with fragments than the unified vision that Dante followed from his Vita nova through the Commedia. Though this poetry collection, famed for inspiring centuries of secular love poetry throughout Europe, may not popularly be read as a religious text, his 366 poems follow the 365 days of the liturgical calendar (with an introduction), he famously met Laura on Good Friday, and the last canzone is dedicated to the Virgin. A suffering lover like his courtly predecessors, Petrarch bears a cross for Laura, which leads to suffering and a form of redemption. Though he is turned into himself, this is consistent with Catherine’s own language of “self-knowledge” as a way to approach the divine.
The turn from Laura to the Virgin at the end of his Rime sparse turns the work into a chain of love that operates between God and humankind. The Virgin is now the object of his love as she stands in as a figure marked by an intimate love relationship with God. The poem becomes a prayer, rife with ritualized and formulaic language that also recalls Dante’s own prayer to the Virgin in Paradiso XXXIII. Speaking of Petrarch’s fascination with monastic spirituality, Mazzotta writes, “It can be said that Petrarch broadens the vast fields of theological reflection at the very moment when he confronts the figments of his vision and the demons of his own self. This is Petrarch’s radical project” (166). That is, Petrarch’s religious writing like De otio religioso do not do the same work that the Rime sparse does to truly expand religious experience in a way that does not relegate it to confined spaces. This mediation between the divine and the secular is evident in Petrarch’s poetic understanding of the Virgin (27-29):
Vergine pura, d’ogni parte intera,
del tuo parto gentil figliuola et madre,
ch’allumi questa vita, et l’atra adorni[57]
The Virgin as mediatrix, who illuminates this life, and adorns the other, working between the poet and the divine, and as a paradoxical woman who is both daughter and mother of her offspring (and later “madre, figliuola et sposa” (47)), serves as a figure that complicates the many fragments of Petrarch’s work and vision.
As exemplified in the figure of the Virgin, one of the more striking aspects of Petrarch’s poetry is his use of paradox and oxymoron, which is frequently employed in mystical writing. Catherine uses oxymoron in many instances to begin to describe her relation to God, or that which is ineffable. In her first Orazione, she sets up a series of binaries, showing how low of a creature she is compared to her creator:
Tu, deità, somma sapiencia, io ignorante e misera creatura, e tu somma ed etterna bontà; io morte e tu se' vita, io tenebre e tu luce, io stoltizia e tu sapiencia, tu infinito e io finita, io inferma e tu medico, io fragile peccatrice che non t'amai mai; tu bellezza purissima e io sozzissima creatura.[58]
The creature represents wretchedness, folly, death, darkness, ignorance and finiteness, while the creator represents all the opposite virtues. The opposing words occurring in close succession create a dizzying effect, and ultimately do not prove to be contradictory as the creature is made of the creator, so the divine (and conceivably the human) can occupy this paradoxical position. Similarly, Petrarch uses oxymoron and paradox throughout his Rime sparse, notably in his Sonnet 134 that treats death and life, hate and love, imprisonment and freedom: “Pace non trovo, et non ò da far guerra; / e temo, et spero; et ardo, et son un ghiaccio” (1-2).[59] The speaker-lover is unable to find peace despite being done with war, and fears and hopes and burns and freezes. Like Catherine, Petrarch juxtaposes contradicting words against each other, to describe his current, love-struck dizzying state. Catherine takes love and hatred in turn as well, as she depicts the soul, which must feed on other souls (that is, winning them to salvation) in her Dialogo: “Dico che ella mangia, prendendo in cibo le anime sulla mensa della santissima croce… Dico che lo schiaccia coi denti, altrimenti non lo potrebbe inghiottire; lo schiaccia con l’odio e con l’amore” (161).[60] Invoking oxymoronic language to describe a paradoxical situation (a soul eating other souls in order to save them) is poetically fitting and makes it possible for Catherine to render this difficult experience in language. For many 14th-century writers, both earthly and divine love exist as experiences outside of the full range of human language, and they rely on literary devices like paradox to attempt to convey these personal events to others.
Petrarch and Dante are among the most successful 14th-century Italian poets, their work among the most canonical of Italian literature, while being among the first ventures and earliest innovations of vernacular writing. Catherine, more often relegated to religious or political rather than literary status (as discussed above), though also writing as one of the founders of the Italian literary tradition, uses language, themes and constructions markedly similar to that of Petrarch and Dante. While each of these texts participate in different communities, appeal to different audiences, and serve various and diverse purposes, a computational analysis of the primary vernacular texts of each author — Dante’s Commedia, Petrarch’s Rime sparse, and Catherine’s Dialogo — show overlaps of diction, topic, and word frequency. This suggests that the work being done by each of these authors is operating within a particular context, and that there is a certain amount of exchange between these different forms and styles of writing (i.e. mystical and lyrical writing).
Before comparing these three texts computationally, it is worth noting that the Dialogo represents the largest corpus by far with 143,906 words, with the Commedia and the Rime sparse containing 101,602 and 57,154 words respectively. Among these three texts, there are 21,549 unique words out of 302,662 words total (7% of the words are unique), and the text with the most vocabulary density is the Commedia, with the Dialogo being the least dense. Dante and Petrarch are much more likely to use variations on the same word in order to fit rhyme schemes and syllabic constraints, and it is up to the analyzer to choose whether or not to render “amore” and “amor” as the same word. In most cases, I chose to have words count differently unless I specify otherwise. These variations of the same word, however, likely cause the density of vocabulary of their texts. Certain words trend throughout the three texts, with notable peaks in frequency occurring across the corpora: “vero” (peak at the end), “anime” (peak at the end), “cielo” (peak in the middle), “etterna” (peak at the end), “misericordia” (peak at the end). The three texts analyzed together reveal a frequent use of words throughout them, including “amore,” “lume,” “desiderio,” “dolce,” “occhio/occhi.” When considering Catherine’s Dialogo alone, along with the words above, “anima” and “virtù” carry more weight. The Rime sparse favors words like “bel,” “ben,” “cor” (not combined with “cuore”), “donna,” “morte” and “sol.” The Commedia utilizes words like “ben,” “disse,” “fuor” and “terra” more frequently. As Dante’s Paradiso works in similar ways to mystical writing, I performed a separate analysis on this canticle (here I changed all instances of “amore” to “amor”), and when compared with the Dialogo, we can see that many words are frequently used across both texts, with “amor”/”amore” and “lume” among the most often used words, and other words and categories of words related to Christ, the mind and consciousness, corporality and nature, and seeing all being shared across the two texts.
        
  
  

Word Cloud Visualization, Catherine’s Dialogo on left, Dante’s Paradiso on right
 See Appendix for full interactive tools




To further see the categories of words and themes that these texts are dealing with, topic modeling analysis was performed across all of the texts mentioned above as well as Catherine’s collection of letters. While stop word lists included personal pronouns for the word frequency analysis, I reinstated them for topic modeling as they would no longer overwhelm the sample sizes. Topic modeling is a means to computationally detect the close proximity of words that renders frequent clusters of words called topics, and the full topic modeling analysis of these texts is in the Appendix below. Between the Paradiso and the Dialogo in particular, the topic with the most weight shares similar words (in bold), with “amore,” “bene,” “grazia,” “lume,” and the personal pronoun “mio” making up its strongest topic:
 
Paradiso:
mia mio amor occhi ben lui dio luce lume ciel vidi mente lor sol donna beatrice veder lei grazia natura
Dialogo:
loro amore anima virtú veritá lume mio corpo pena bene sangue grazia desiderio decto figliuolo affecto morte sancta dio miei
 
This data suggests that lyric poetry and mystical writing may well inform each other, and that Catherine’s writing, far from being unlearned, is actively engaging with the larger linguistic world of her time. 
________________


Appendix
Word Frequency and Usage:
Catherine’s Dialogo:
http://bit.ly/Voyant-Dialogo 


Petrarca Rime Sparse:
http://bit.ly/Voyant-RimeSparse 


Dante Commedia: 
http://bit.ly/Voyant-DivinaCommedia 


Three texts together:
http://bit.ly/Voyant-CatDanPet 


Dante Paradiso alone:
http://bit.ly/Voyant-Paradiso 


Topic Modeling
Dialgogo
0        9.13384        contrari virtuosi gionse adietro finisce reame vergini ciechi germina muovo strada ignoranti cognosca fratello organi poverelli pecunia infernale perregrinazione parlarò 
1        9.33998        reputazione vegono infermi schiecto siate uccidere glorioso corna calore disposta segni piccola crescere riprendere possano povarelli passano dichiarato ingrassa parlandoti 
2        8.89512        costato fondato distesamente principalmente acquistato giudicano adietro venuti dolcissima mirano ordinate sicura acompagnata cuori crescendo inanzi tenuto avilendo erba garzone 
3        60.39179        mia caritá sancto fuoco cognoscimento intellecto ragione spirito vedi colpa ama ministri onore carissima quegli umana pare possa perfecta coscienzia 
4        116.15924        loro amore anima virtú veritá lume mio corpo pena bene sangue grazia desiderio decto figliuolo affecto morte sancta dio miei 
5        9.37581        obligati creai scala dono sacerdote gustato predecto disponere originale trovata misera proponimento muore electi angeli aspecta empie seme lavoratore disposto 
6        9.06        possibile rendo paresse essenzia percuote dimostra venuto proximi adornamento vedesti strada dilecta difendere pruovi provedesse abbonda disonesti potevi lesione davo 
7        8.77981        signori temporalmente proprie confessione illuminato partí bere possibile debito aspecta preghi sposo parturisce affliggitiva tempesta doctrina investigare ringraziando aprire portino 
8        8.13811        mortale sottrago servizio incarnato pigliando sovenendo povaregli amici merollo tempestoso lacte vedi obbedisce pensieri superbi levano appetisce signori dilonga mandò 
9        9.8335        temptazioni volendo ami perduta menzione macti costrigne rancore cerchi misurato cibi vedessi vitoperio levi commectere differenzia rimedio usata largo terminò 


Lettere
0        0.51441        lume volontà fede dio dimonio mente virtù pena perfezione pazienzia l'anima viva fusse dottrina confusione orazione debbe loro umilità pare 
1        0.31518        pazienzia bene disordinato servire signore l'uomo fadiga delizie fratello vento ricchezza ch'è mortale ch'egli povertà speranza l'affetto somma piacere signoria 
2        0.21291        verità lume papa santa loro chiesa fede bene medesimi urbano sommo chè vero colpa cognoscere bugia male sete terra debito 
3        0.21046        mia sposa figliuola sposo vedi vederti figliuole mio voglio vestimento permani sai cibo carissima carissime mie monna diceva mensa allora 
4        0.1565        tilocblob dimonio battaglia carne fortezza nemici forte perseveranzia l'uomo nemico campo coltello combattere l'arme colpi cavaliere morto virile l'ha pensieri 
5        0.38635        carità fuoco padre figliuolo perocché croce santo legame siate inestimabile l'anima dolcissimo amore disse mia spirito fratello letizia creatura divina 
6        0.88699        dio carità virtù prossimo amore l'anima ama vuole lui l'amore vede grazia ragione creatore amare vera bene creatura perocché cognoscimento 
7        2.72183        dio cristo dolce gesù sangue crocifisso desiderio amore santa dico morte figliuolo servi bontà virtù nome maria croce santo volontà 
8        0.36271        padre loro chiesa santa timore pace santo giustizia sposa città mia contra salute pare pregovi santissimo sudditi guerra difetti santità 
9        0.0467        christo jesù gratitudine jhesù crocifixo sancta gratia honore necessità voluntà fornace facto fonte crucifixo iddio lettera sancto pretioso frate dilectione 


Commedia
0        46.13202        serpente segnore appressa venian ardore seme breve affezione giardino padri quieto stazio piacere incominciò metter vela difetto portò monti fiesole 
1        44.58933        contrario dimandi ammirar preme morsi grotta fidanza lamenti disposto ride innamora folgór rivolta difalta ascondeva parnaso cantor appetito duci spazio 
2        493.2479        mio lui occhi ben disse lor mia vidi pur amor terra fuor dio gente maestro veder lei ciel mente sol 
3        46.66983        letè natural picciola semo ritorno vòta marito novità volete spense spere traluce stolti cantor seguì punita pensar discoverto lucerna poter 
4        44.09171        cerchi solamente verno toglie cerchio morso scrive deh greve tace ahi parlato vel fiore mosser conviensi insegna puosi scoscende varca 
5        40.87182        frati aspetti pianger caduto orribil chiamar avessi puro tacendo tòrre stole nascendo amando giustamente buca pecore siena sicuramente imago risponder 
6        42.10966        porte effetto intender falso purga partì piega scender tant emme rimasa infiamma tacea sùe cigli amai volgendo pianeto truova pensieri 
7        44.02933        scorta perde scema gusto die veloci prim verdi deh pesi faccendo passammo ombre battesmo parvenza suggello sustanze vos cari meta 
8        42.87266        splendori sazio seppe sanno parvente parrebbe ruote maggiore seguette ambascia scese mare muro tenendo vermo muto bruto lagrime vide pate 
9        42.19615        arca viene falla movendo sappiendo piombo parlarmi vinci ovra danni pensa sovrano pelo spiriti malvagia poli facella suora libertate dimostri 


Paradiso
0        384.96012        sete giro buon diverse infiamma sospesa seguiva attenta alti dolci onore veggi cristiani segue splendor omo produce tante porti fissi 
1        345.15462        move sesto alquanto pio festa vince processo mano nasconde barca veggion avessi innocenza glorïose orazione ritrassi fosti costume potesse ricominciò 
2        3,054.2931        mia mio amor occhi ben lui dio luce lume ciel vidi mente lor sol donna beatrice veder lei grazia natura 
3        355.66841        marte cerchi giardino popol novella nova costui morte maraviglia diletto fior spene cantor frutto costei sante nascose parola sien alma 
4        330.20577        mille accende alte spere ride vinse apparenza percosse chiaro veloci vinca affezione ricorda prieghi corta cantor fier avëa angelo saria 
5        381.54445        vera tesoro città antico nessun uscì danno intende primi segni creatura emisperio intrava sopr dilata credenza proferta ferve ricorda leväi 
6        363.09469        appunta ama allegrezza leva santo ramo tutt forti chiara alta ritorno costui duca dura mare giusta bianca lieto lor cerchi 
7        386.31652        udi farà guardando spirito luogo bernardo conforto volando oramai siate carco visïone grado virtute ammirar creature cominciò spirò sanz accosta 
8        337.00208        giri vedi uscir nullo movea carca sigillo viste uomini disse contento canto ardito miro menti nozze conti quinto scritto conosce 
9        357.6609        facea persona accende spirito conio concetto grandi segnor vederai venìa moïsè accorsi risponder cesare quant donnea ricorre cieco cintura mei 


Rime sparse
0        384.96012        sete giro buon diverse infiamma sospesa seguiva attenta alti dolci onore veggi cristiani segue splendor omo produce tante porti fissi 
1        345.15462        move sesto alquanto pio festa vince processo mano nasconde barca veggion avessi innocenza glorïose orazione ritrassi fosti costume potesse ricominciò 
2        3,054.2931        mia mio amor occhi ben lui dio luce lume ciel vidi mente lor sol donna beatrice veder lei grazia natura 
3        355.66841        marte cerchi giardino popol novella nova costui morte maraviglia diletto fior spene cantor frutto costei sante nascose parola sien alma 
4        330.20577        mille accende alte spere ride vinse apparenza percosse chiaro veloci vinca affezione ricorda prieghi corta cantor fier avëa angelo saria 
5        381.54445        vera tesoro città antico nessun uscì danno intende primi segni creatura emisperio intrava sopr dilata credenza proferta ferve ricorda leväi 
6        363.09469        appunta ama allegrezza leva santo ramo tutt forti chiara alta ritorno costui duca dura mare giusta bianca lieto lor cerchi 
7        386.31652        udi farà guardando spirito luogo bernardo conforto volando oramai siate carco visïone grado virtute ammirar creature cominciò spirò sanz accosta 
8        337.00208        giri vedi uscir nullo movea carca sigillo viste uomini disse contento canto ardito miro menti nozze conti quinto scritto conosce 
9        357.6609        facea persona accende spirito conio concetto grandi segnor vederai venìa moïsè accorsi risponder cesare quant donnea ricorre cieco cintura mei 










________________




Catherine’s Dialogo:
http://bit.ly/Voyant-Dialogo 


Petrarca Rime Sparse:
http://bit.ly/Voyant-RimeSparse 


Dante Commedia: 
http://bit.ly/Voyant-DivinaCommedia 


Three texts together:
http://bit.ly/Voyant-CatDanPet 


Dante Paradiso alone:
http://bit.ly/Voyant-Paradiso 








________________




Italian, challenges w topic modeling, bc flexibility of language, conjugations. Changed ‘nferno → inferno, for example. V’amai and ideas of amore count separately, as does ama, but still revealing in certain ways 
tolta - taken
Keeping:
* io
* male
* me
* ben
* bene
* benissimo
* brava
* bravo
* tu
* lui
* lei
* mi
* mia
* mie
* miei
* mio
have to add spaces between punctuation at times, if I keep tu it will not map along with tua/tuo, for example
keep all “me”s to see how self-reflexive
parrà - seems
make sure apostrophes are consistent across text files
add spaces after apostrophes
















"cyborg politics is the struggle for language and the struggle against perfect communication, against the one code that translates all meaning perfectly, the central dogma of phallogocentrism" - Haraway




Jacopone da Todi (ca. 1236-1306) 
“You run and you stand still, you rise as you fall;
The more you give the more you receive:
You possess the Creator.


In being possessed you possess,
In seamless union;
As you drink you are being drunk —
Nothing can separate you
From this perfection.
There is no impediment,
For he will no longer close His hand to you,
To you, His Lady, His bride.”(Jacopone 272-273)


http://english.nd.edu/people/faculty/knoppers/ - art as part of lit argument








Quotes from Kristeva’s Teresa My Love:
“Let Him kiss me with the kiss of His mouth .… I confess that the passage has many meanings. but the soul that is enkindled with a love that makes it mad [que la desatina] desires nothing else than to say those words …. God help me! Why are we surprised? [¿Qué nos espanta?] Isn’t the deed more admirable? 
Teresa of Avila, Meditations on the Song of Songs” - p. 203


“Hail Teresa, borderless[ab] woman, physical hysterical erotic epileptic, made word, made flesh, who unravels inside and outside herself, tides of images without pictures, tumults of words, cascades of fluorescence, a thousand tongues listening out for who for what, listening to time etched in stone, eardrum larynx cry out, night and brightness, too much body yet disembodied, beyond matter, empty gaping matrix throbbing for the Beloved ever-present and yet never there, but there’s presence and presence, His in her, hers in Him, sensed felt buried, sensation without perception, dart or glass, pierced or transparent, that is the question, transverberated instead, and again inundated, La Madre being the most virile of monks, most canny of the herders of souls, a veritable twin of Christ, she is He, He is she, the Truth is me, or Him in the deepest part of me, me Teresa, a successful paranoiac, God is myself and what of it, what’s the matter? A free-for-all, who can beat that? Certainly not Schreber, not even Freud, awfully serious chap from Vienna, gloomy rather, a woman finds it easier to talk about these things, what things, well, her of course, her beside herself, obviously, in the throes of dread and delight, little butterfly expiring with indelible joy because Jesus has become it or rather her, butterfly-Jesus, woman-Jesus, I know someone who though she’s not a poet composes poems without trying, novels that are poems with an extra something, extra movements, I wonder whether it is really I, Teresa, speaking, the path that is pain, the Nothingness of everything, that everything which is nothing, do what is in you to do, but gaily, be cheerful, my daughters, for twenty years I vomited every morning, now it’s in the evenings and it’s harder to bring up, I have to provoke it with a feather or some such thing, like a baby a baby girl if you prefer latched on to the Other’s teat, mystic or is it spiritual marriage, young John of the Cross says there’s a difference, I don’t really see it, more like two sides of a coin, or like the Song of Songs, as always as ever she sings off-key but she writes true and carries on founding her convents, her girls, her Church, her own gestation, her game, a game of chess, games are allowed, oh yes, even in a cloister, especially in a cloister, God loves us to be playful, believe me, girls, Jesus loved women, what are the Doctors so scared of in us, yes, checkmate to God too, oh yes, Teresa or Molly Bloom, I am numb at last, I flow into the water of the garden, flow on by, all we do is feel pleasure, souls that love can see all the way into atoms, that’s right, for yes is all there is to souls like mine, mine sees as far as the infinite atoms that are atoms of love, the philosophers don’t have a clue, they become scholars, they recoil from your sensations, the best of them are mathematicians, tamers of infinity, and yet it’s as simple as that, oh yes, metaphors mutating into metamorphoses, or possibly the other way around, oh yes, Teresa, my sister, invisible, ecstatic, eccentric, beside yourself in you, beside myself in me, yes, Teresa, my love, yes.” - p. 26-27


“The eroticization of this ordeal makes manifest the torments of the desiring body within the family triangle: incest with both parents, and more specifically with the Father, is not just an unconscious desire, for it turns into a preconscious one. With girls, the father-daughter encounter, unconsciously courted and sublimated in passionate nuptials with Christ’s “sacred humanity,” goes to stimulate the cultural and social energy of the Christian woman. With boys, the fantasy of a homosexual encounter with the father, equally unconsciously courted, ends up favoring social attachments based on warrior and political fraternities, with the risk of drifting into multiple forms of deviance and permissiveness.” - p. 405


“Nor did You, Lord, when You walked in the world, despise women.
Teresa of Avila, The Way of Perfection


They are very womanish … [be] like strong men.
Teresa of Avila, The Way of Perfection” - p. 453


Madness of love w God (Ariosto?)
Beatrice of Nazareth (1200-1268): “It seems to the soul that the veins are bursting, the blood spilling, the marrow withering, the bones softening, the heart burning, the throat parching, so that the face and all the members perceive the inward heat, and this is the madness of love. At this time she also feels an arrow piercing through her heart all the way to the throat and beyond to the brain, as if she would lose her mind” (Flowering of Mysticism 172).


Topic modeling of Petrarch, Dante’s (others?) love poetry, compare with Cathering


People that want to get highest should renounce the wisdom of the world & also knowledge of letters, to be dispossessed of such inheritance & go naked to the Lord -- vernacular writing


 BUT IS THE MYSTIC REALLY GENDERED!!! Can the male mystic be said to be this inside/outside ambiguity or not? Queer[ac]
Conversion → trans → bodily conversion
This worldly: the third order → remain in the world but access to transcendence (previously, better to be a hermit as you were somehow more successful in that you only needed God)
Suffering → joy
sacred / profane
https://libsearch.cuny.edu/F/DG5STCVJ7JUQYIMVQ9I2UMN1LIEAENEB56RK9NFTTGG5EHPAVR-09144?func=full-set-set&set_number=009206&set_entry=000001&format=999 - gray area of men/women and exorcism?


        courtly love poetry

        


Chapter 1 will consist of three sections, beginning with a theoretical grounding utilizing gender theory to describe the situation of the mystic and how mystics have negotiated agency through their relative position outside of or traversing both gender binaries and earthly-spiritual binaries in their visionary writing. In this section I will explore the mystical transgression of heteronormative roles through theoretical texts that will support the identifying and analyzing of the subject position problematizing done by religious writers and Catherine of Siena in particular. Among the theorists who will inform this inquiry are Kristeva (“Stabat Mater”), Butler (Gender Trouble), Sedgwick (Epistemology of the Closet), Harraway (“Cyborg Manifesto”) and Braidotti (Nomadic Subjects, The Posthuman), as their texts will establish the mystic as a figure contextualized as queer, nomadic and cybernetic (an amalgamation between nature and divine).








        
St Francis’s French language & Catherine’s writing?


Action & the Mystic in Beauvoir: Ecstasies, visions, talks with God, relationship between contemplation and action
         * Women of action who know very well what goals they have in mind and lucidly devise means for attaining them; their visions simply provide objective images for their certitudes, encouraging these women to persist in the paths they have mapped out in detail for themselves
            * St Catherine
            * St Teresa
            * Joan of Arc
         * Narcissistic women -- silent fervor → apostolic state, they do something
      * Mystical fervor, like love and even narcissism, can be integrated with a life of activity and independence
         * But in themselves, bound to meet with failure
         * She is either putting herself into relation with an unreality: her double, or God; or she creates an unreal relation with a real being
            * In both cases, she lacks any grasp on the world; she does not escape her subjectivity; her liberty remains frustrated


        Indeed, Dante refers to the angels as “amatori” much like how Catherine refers to herself and other religious people who seek divine truth through erotic language. 
This is all coming from the same tradition!
Courly love uses mi’signore - my lord, it’s all the same
        






Because of Catherine’s letters, we have more than these echoes of past involvement in a community of women. Of her letters that survive, one-third of them were written to women, proving the significance of her relationships with women, as well as her esteem of them, as she chooses to not only address the pope, political leaders and her confessors in her letters, but the women belonging to her order as well as those from different classes. The female community she belonged to were also significant in the propagation of her letters, as they were her first scribes. The dispersal of Catherine’s letters therefore establishes a group of women capable of reading and writing in the vernacular — not considered to be literacy in a Latinate world, but still revealing of the education attained by these individuals.
________________
[1] Today, Francis’s eating habits would be considered raw-food vegan, though this was probably more of an expression of abstention and bodily denial than an interest in non-human animal welfare. 
[2] For more on this text, see Alison Knowles Frazier’s Possible Lives[ah]. 
[3] See also Tylus p. 83. Among her primary scribes were the Dominican sisters Alessa de’ Saracini, Francesca Gori and Giovanna Pazza, and young laymen Neri di Landoccio, Stefano Maconi and Barduccio Canigiani.
[4] See, for example: Egan’s “Intention in the Editing of Shakespeare,” the chapter “Shakespeare and Lord Strange’s Men” in Manley and MacLean’s Lord Strange's Men and Their Plays, Vickers’s Shakespeare, Co-Author: A Historical Study of Five Collaborative Plays.


[5] Brunetto Latini, Dante’s famous damned teacher, argues that Cicero’s teachings on speeches also apply to letters, suggesting to me that the oral production of writing is rhetorically sound. Latini’s French Tresor reinforces his notion that speaking is equivalent to letters:” Or dit li mastres que la escience de retorique est en .ii. mainieres, une qui est en dissant de boche & une autre que l’en mande par letres; mais li ensegnement sont comun, car il ne puet chaloir que l’en die ou en conte ou que l’en mande par letres…” (296). For a full discussion of the Ars dictaminis and Brunetto Latini, see Witt’s Brunetto Latini and the Italian Tradition of Ars Dictaminis.
[6] For a discussion, see Chapter 4 of Naomi R. Goldenberg’s Changing of the Gods: Feminism and the End of Traditional Religions, 1979; and Chapter 1 of Jacques Derrida’s Le toucher, Jean-Luc Nancy, 2000.
[7] On this topic, see scholarship by David Meconi (“Traveling without Moving: Love as. Ecstatic Union in Plotinus, Augustine, and Dante”), Marguerite Chiarenza (“Dante’s Lady Poverty”), Carolynn Lund-Mead (“Dante and Androgyny”), J.A. Mazzeo (“Plato’s Eros and Dante’s Amore”).
[8] Catherine is not formally tried for witchcraft, but friends, family and her first confessor believed that her refusal to eat may have been the work of a demon. For more on this, see Rudolph Bell’s chapter, “I, Catherine” in his monograph Holy Anorexia, 1985. 
[9] As McGinn notes, “God lies beyond all distinctions of gender and the ordinary realms of consciousness (Flowering of Mysticism 169).
[10] This is divergent from Genesis 2.21-22, where Eve is constructed from the rib of Adam. Genesis 1.27 is closer to Genesis 5.1-2, though I contend that Genesis 5 is clearer in its meaning that both Adam and Eve are understood to be in God’s image, whereas Genesis 1 and 2 could be argued that Adam is created in God’s image while Eve may not be.
[11] For a discussion of the history of “queering” the Song of Solomon, see Moore, Stephen D. “The Song of Songs in the History of Sexuality.” Church History, Vol. 69, No. 2 (Jun., 2000), pp. 328-349. For a discussion on the masculine nature of the bride, see Krahmer, Shawn M. “The Virile Bride of Bernard of Clairvaux.” Church History, Vol. 69, No. 2 (Jun., 2000), pp. 304-327.
[12] Ambrose similarly conflates the Bride with the image of the preacher, and refers to her/his breasts; see Expos. Ps. 118 6.18 (ed. Petschenig, p. 117.16-25). Additionally, Ambrose applies the imagery of the Song of Songs to specific individuals and events, including Emperor Valentinian II’s ascent into heaven (The Foundations of Mysticism 212).
[13] As McGuire notes this is in part owed to linguistic similarities: “the happy coincidence of the latin terms LAUDANS ET LACTANS” (200).
[14] “Qui cum maxima devocione ad eam accessit et per illum sanctissimum liquorem, quem suxit, tantam adeptus est scienciam litterarum, ut apud Romam acciperet cardinalem dignitate” (Hilka 164, emphasis mine). 
[15] For a discussion on the Virgin of Guadalupe in present-day Catholicism, see Valentina Napolitano’s Migrant Hearts and the Atlantic Return: Transnationalism and the Roman Catholic Church. For a feminist analysis on the trajectory of paganism to Judeo-Christian religions, see Adriana Cavarero’s Nonostante Platone. 
[16] Mary’s assumption into Heaven is not in Biblical text, but was written into doctrine by Pope Pius XII in 1950 (Munificentissimus Deus). In the Old Testament, two men are ambiguously described as being taken away by God rather than dying in a bodily way: Enoch (Genesis 5:24) and Elijah (2 Kings 2:11).
[17] See Jesus as Mother: Studies in the Spirituality of the High Middle Ages and Wonderful Blood: Theology and Practice in Late Medieval Northern Germany and Beyond, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2007.
[18] Translation from The Foundations of Western Mysticism by Bernard McGinn, p. 248.
[19] Jesus’s virginity is made implicit in Hebrews 4:15. 
[20] “Io allora sentiva uno giubilo e un odore del sangue suo; e non era senza l'odore del mio.” / “I sensed an intense joy, a fragrance of his blood — and it wasn’t separate from the fragrance of my own.”
[21] “...e così voi versate l'acqua del santo desiderio sopra il capo de' fratelli vostri, che sono membri nostri, ligati nel corpo della dolce Sposa.” / “I mean, with a boundless desire pour the water over the heads of your brothers and sisters who are our members bound together in the body of the sweet [B]ride.”
[22] For a discussion on this, as well as some analysis on the gendering of tears, see Brian Patrick McGuire’s “Monks and Tears:A Twelfth-Century Change” in The Difficult Saint: Bernard of Clairvaux and his Tradition, 1991.
[23] “Du bist drivaltig an dir, du maht wol gottes bilde sin: Du bist ein menlich man an dinem strite, du bist ein wolgerzieret juncfrowe in dem palast vor dinem herren, du bist ein lustlichú brut in dinem minnebette gottes!” Das fliessende Licht II.19.
[24] See, for example, Charles Darwent’s “Arrows of desire: How did St Sebastian become an enduring, homo-erotic icon?” in the Independent. http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/features/arrows-of-desire-how-did-st-sebastian-become-an-enduring-homo-erotic-icon-779388.html 
[25] Within the tradition of Christian allegory, with many commentaries written in the Middle Ages, the female protagonist of the Song of Songs is identified both as the Church (the collective people of God) and as the individual soul of the Christian who approaches Christ (constructed as the male bridegroom). For a full analysis of this tradition as well as how it differs from Jewish tradition, see Stephen D. Moore’s chapter on “The Song of Songs in the History of Sexuality” in his monograph God’s Beauty Parlor and Other Queer Spaces in and Around the Bible, 2001. 
[26] As in Chaucer’s Reeve’s Tale and Nun’s Priest’s Tale. For a discussion of this trope in art history, see Malcolm[ad] Jones’s “Sex and Sexuality in Late Medieval and Early Modern Art,” p. 187-304 in Erlach 1994. 
[27] Angela of Foligno also famously removes her clothes in church.
[28] Holy Feast, Holy Fast and Holy Anorexia.
[29] Letter 221[af][ag].
[30] Letter T273.
[31] Mystics who wrote on marriage between the soul and Christ include Bonaventure, David of Augsburg, Gilbert of Hoyland, John of Fécamp, Richard of St. Victor, William of St. Thierry (see McGinn’s four volumes on Mysticism for more).
[32] Translation from The Foundations of Mysticism by Bernard McGinn, p. 125.
[33] “Sólo Vos en mí viví” (Teresa[ae]
[34] Translation from Visions and Longings: Medieval Women Mystics by Monica Furlong, p. 109.
[35] “Oh, if I could but seize those lovely tresses which have become both whip and lash for me, / from very early matins / I’d make them ringing bells unto the night: / and I would not be pitying or kind, / but like a playful bear with her I’d play; / and, since Love whips me still, / I would avenge myself a thousandfold” (tr. Tusiani, p. 99). 
[36] “...oh mad lover! And you have need of your creature? It seems so to me, for you act as if you could not live without her, in spite of the fact that you are Life itself, and everything has life from you and nothing can have life without you. Why then are you so mad? Because you have fallen in love with what you have made! You are pleased and delighted over her within yourself, as if you were drunk [with desire] for her salvation. She runs away from you and you go looking for her. She strays and you draw closer to her. You clothed yourself in our humanity, and nearer than that you could not have come” (trans. Noffke).
[37] “Oh unutterable love, even though you saw all the evils that all your creatures would commit against your infinite goodness, you acted as if you did not see and set your eye only on the beauty of your creature, with whom you had fallen in love like one drunk and crazy with love. And in love you drew us out of yourself, giving us being in your own image and likeness. You, eternal Truth, have told me the truth: that love compelled you to create us. Even though you saw that we would offend you, your charity would not let you set your eyes on that sight. No, you took your eyes off the sin that was to be and fixed your gaze only on your creature’s beauty. For if you had concentrated on the sin, you would have forgotten the love you had for creating humankind. Not that the sin was hid from you, but you concentrated on the love because you are nothing but a fire of love, crazy over what you have made” (trans. Noffke as Prayer 13, 18 February 1379).
[38] This mystical expression of the experience of love is long-resonating, as being drunk and crazy in love are still very much a part of western culture’s love rhetoric, as exemplified in Beyoncé’s “Crazy in Love” (2003) and “Drunk in Love” (2013). 
[39] Here Newman cites the Règle des Fins Amans: “The fin amant is exhorted to think of her lover often, to seek out his favorite haunts, and to receive the jewels he sends her gladly, although these consist of ‘poverty, diseases, maladies, and tribulations” (141).
[40] See “Catherine of Siena’s Heart,” pp. 815-816.
[41] I paraphrase: Vile people cannot behold her / I become more virtuous [because of her] / No one that has bad thoughts can look at her. 
[42] “and truly seems a thing come from the sky / to show on earth what miracles can be” Trans. Tusiani.
[43] “What heart could keep from bursting with love at the sight of this sweet savory fruit, our good and gentle Jesus, whom God the Father has given to holy Church as her Spouse? We ought then to run like people in love; as faithful Christians we ought to be lovers of this holy Church, members bound together in this bride, a mystic body.” Trans. Noffke.
[44] “For her sweetness there is no description, / Every gentle virtue bows towards her, / And Beauty makes her its [goddess]. / Our minds can never soar so high, / Nor have we grace enough inside, / For us to ever know her perfectly.” Trans.: A.S. Kline[ai].


[45] “I was within the heaven that receives / more of His light; and I saw things that he / who from that height descends, forgets or can / not speak …” Trans. Mandelbaum, I.4-7.
[46] “in such a way that what / I tell is only rudimentary” Trans. Mandelbaum, XXXIII.89-90.
[47] “I believe that I saw” (my translation).
[48] “What little I recall is to be told, / from this point on, in words more weak than those / of whose infant tongue still bathes at the breast” Trans. Mandelbaum, XXXIII.106-108.
[49] “What tongue could describe the marvel of this final unitive stage and the many different fruits the soul receives when its powers are so filled? … And so the light runs on, all of you showing forth, now one way, now another. But the inmost feeling, the ineffable sweetness and perfect union — you cannot describe it with your tongue, which is a finite thing!” Trans. Noffke. 
[50] Letter T204.
“I long to see you engulfed and set on fire in Christ Jesus that you will be completely lost to yourself. But I don’t see how you can unless your mind’s eye rises above yourself in true desire to gaze into the eye of the divine charity with which God looked on his creatures before he created us. And so he still looks on us.” Trans. Noffke. 
[51] “For Love can make the wisest turn astray; / Love, at its most, of measure still has least; / He is the maddest man who loves the best” Trans. Rossetti[aj].
[52] “For he looked on us within himself and fell so boundlessly in love with us that for love he created us to share and enjoy the good he possessed in himself” Trans. Noffke.
[53] See “The Rime Petrose and the Purgatorial Palinode,” 1987.
[54] “Così nel mio parlar voglio esser aspro,” lines 30-32.
“...all my thinking / may so shine through as to be seen outside — / more than I tremble at this death, now biting / all of my senses with the teeth of Love” (29-32) Trans. Tusiani.
[55] Paradiso XXVI 49-51.
“But tell me, too, if you feel other cords / draw you toward Him, so that you voice aloud / all of the teeth by which this love grips you” Trans. Mandelbaum.


[56] “Fragments of common things” or “Fragments composed in vernacular,” now often referred to as the “Rime sparse” or “Il canzoniere.”
[57] “Virgin, pure, perfect in every way, / daughter and mother to your noble Son, / you who illuminate this life, adorn the other” Trans. A.S. Kline.
[58] “I am a foolish and wretched creature / while you are supreme eternal goodness. / I am death / and you are life. / I am darkness / and you are light. / I am ignorance / and you are wisdom. / You are infinite / and I am finite. / I am sick / and you are the doctor. / I am a weak sinner who have never loved you. / You are purest beauty / and I am the filthiest of creatures.” Trans. Noffke.
[59] “I find no peace, and all my war is done / I fear and hope, I burn and freeze like ice” Trans. Wyatt.
[60] “She eats the food of souls for my honor at the table of the most holy cross … And she chews it (for otherwise she could not digest it) with hatred and love” Trans. Noffke.
[a]Vision w Christ at doorway
[b]beef this up -- what do they say?
[c]Add meat & citations
[d]citation
[e]add that she is a noblewoman, maybe some background
[f]Quote Caffarini
[g]Give some kind of context too
[h]verify
[i]Canzoniere in Vatican Library partially written in Petrarch's own hand
[j]Could not find anything about texts written in Francis's own hand, but may need to verify
[k]August 22, 1938. James Strachey's Standard Edition vol 23 in the "Findings, Ideas, Problems" section -- this sentence was written alone
[l]yearning for
[m]https://clio.columbia.edu/catalog/994519


http://www.themiddleages.net/people/dante_paper.html
[n]Please talk about this in terms of the language later, Dante's eroticism along with Petrarch's language of love
[o]WAIT -- is poetry informing mystical writing, or is mystical writing informing poetry????
[p]https://books.google.com/books?id=i95QAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA47&lpg=PA47&dq=erotic+love+paradiso+dante&source=bl&ots=8kl-M1nfp3&sig=e-I2orKTBPnY2vSlNc2-w61Jvxs&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CB0Q6AEwAGoVChMInuPrkfWnyAIVCTo-Ch1bMAoe#v=onepage&q=erotic%20love%20paradiso%20dante&f=false
[q]she is supported by Bernard of Clairvaux
[r]Per Clare's notes, but can't find the citation
[s]and more?
[t]King James and American Standard, citation needed
[u]Should something about Teresa of Avila's ideas on Song of Songs go here?
[v]The Works of Bernard of Clairvaux, vols. 2-5: On the Song of Songs I-IV, ed. M. Basil Pennington, trans. Kilian Walsh and Irene Edmonds (Spencer, Mass.: Cistercian Publications, 1971-80).
[w]The neutral
[x]is there a better French word for this?
[y]Should I use a gender neutral "they" ?
[z]http://jesusinlove.blogspot.com/2011/11/blessed-bernardo-de-hoyos-mystical-same.html
[aa]Give some context for this once you have the source
[ab]In conversation w Santa Muerte
[ac]http://www.earlham.edu/history/earlham-historical-journal/
http://www.earlham.edu/media/1683292/to-queer-or-not-to-queer.pdf
[ad]https://books.google.com/books?id=OzzjBAAAQBAJ&pg=PA176&lpg=PA176&dq=malcolm+jones+sex+sexuality+medieval+early+modern&source=bl&ots=NtT3uCQfAO&sig=ZmgpHt0jb7X2EoTObL3xOsU3MB0&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CCEQ6AEwAWoVChMIvLaJrNCCyQIVhOQmCh3URwEW#v=onepage&q=malcolm%20jones%20sex%20sexuality%20medieval%20early%20modern&f=false
[ae]Page number?
[af]Find the T Letter citation
[ag]May find it in Holy Feast, Holy Fast
[ah]chapter?
[ai]Bibliography: http://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Italian/Cavalcanti.htm
[aj]http://www.michaelbryson.net/teaching/csun/italianandenglishpoetry.pdf