Introduction


Born in 1347 of a wool-dyer father, Caterina di Iacopo di Benincasa chose a religious life against her family’s wishes, as they had wanted her to marry. At 6 years of age, she had her first mystical vision of Christ, at 7 she made a vow of perpetual virginity to God, and at 21, she married Christ in a vision. In the years leading to her mystical marriage, she diligently practiced asceticism, which Suzanne Noffke describes as “silent solitude” and “cozy isolationism” (65). In her youth and adolescence, Catherine was largely private, occupying a small room in her father’s house, while practicing daily flagellations and extreme fasting. Because of the severity of her actions, and their effects on her health, her biographer Raymond of Capua tells his readers that her family required her to keep her door ajar (V, 52). As she had decided early in life to dedicate herself to God, Catherine had initially followed a traditional approach typical of hermitage and cloistering of oneself, a popular form of spirituality through the Middle Ages. Indeed, the 13th and 14th centuries found fertile ground for religious expression in the urban centers of Italy — especially in Siena — with male and particularly female recluses well supported by the city and visible to society. In the year of Catherine’s birth, 80% of Siena’s recluses were women (Thurber 47). By the second half of the 14th century, urban reclusion, which existed on the boundaries of cities and the boundaries of institutionalized religion, began to decline, while the third order “secular” vocations,[1] for those who wanted to be part of a religious community without greatly changing their current lives, were increasingly considered to be more appropriate channels for female lay religious expression (Thurber 72). Although Catherine had at first seemed content in her reclusive life, she was eventually compelled by God to lead a public life.[2]
While Catherine certainly spent her early years as an ascetic, her transition to communal space seems to have been grounded in her experiences. In her youth, she was attracted to the travelling Dominican preachers (Order of Friars Preachers) who came through Siena, and — as Raymond explains — Catherine so esteemed these Dominican friars that she longed to enter their Order to help guide people in spiritual matters. However, Catherine realized that her status as a woman would prevent her from joining them, leading her to consider following Saint Euphrosyne’s model to pass herself as a man (III, 38). As Carolyn Muessig notes, Catherine would eventually prove to be an “itinerant peacemaker, papal representative of sorts, spiritual counselor, theologian, and tireless letter writer” (4). And Raymond himself writes that “her life was to follow lines far different from those of other women,” as God sent her to live among people, working for others in public places (XII, 116). However, it was through communities of civic-minded and spiritual women that Catherine learned and flourished, and throughout her life she served as a community-builder and advocate to both secular and religious, regardless of gender. 
Catherine joined the Mantellate, a tertiary order of the Dominicans consisting of mostly widowed and married laywomen, when she was about 18 years old. The women at first did not want to accept her, as her status as a virgin was not typical of the order, but she was persistent and persuasive, as she would also prove to be in her subsequent political affairs. When Catherine first joined, she was still committed to prayer and solitude, but her work for the ill as a mantellata may have contributed in compelling her to leave her private space. The mantellate were dedicated to caring for the ill and doing good, and it was in hospitals that these groups of women gathered. Their center in Siena was the Spedale di Santa Maria della Scala, near the Duomo. As Jane Tylus notes, the hospital “represented an intermediary space between public and private ... for the layperson dedicated to acts of mercy” (68). Because of Siena’s location on the Via Francigena, the ancient pilgrimage route to Rome, the mantellate cared not only for their geographical neighbors but also for many visitors. Thus, Catherine’s position as a lay Dominican proved to be beneficial though her initial desire to be in the mantellate may have seemed contradictory. In this position, she had access to larger circles of people through her affiliation with the Dominicans and was able to engage with people of the world by living outside of a monastery, not unlike her Italian predecessor Francis of Assisi.
In 1374, Catherine first traveled to Florence, and she spent most of 1375 in Pisa, where she cultivated a greater public reputation. While she had started constructing herself as a public figure in Siena, she generated excitement during her extended stay in Pisa and established herself as a public preacher and miracle worker (Capecelatro 107, Tylus 134). It is from Pisa that Catherine begins to engage in intense and frequent letter-writing, often addressing her spiritual and blood famiglia in Siena. In 1376 she traveled to Avignon and is credited with the pope’s return to Rome in September of that year, proving herself as effectively engaged in politics. Still, as a woman in the public sphere, she was accused of vainglory, which Raymond sought to defend her from throughout the last chapter of his Legenda. As one may expect, this is a gendered issue, as Raymond notes her critics claimed, “‘She’s a woman. Why doesn’t she stay in her cell, if it’s God she wants to serve?’” (IV, 365). Raymond writes that both men and women are accusatory, but in the face of persecution she proved her sanctity through steadfastness, commitment to the public work of God, and through her desire for martyrdom. Although he mentions Catherine’s companions often and writes of Catherine’s public outreach, Raymond in some ways works to assert her as a solitary holy figure, committed primarily to working miracles and practicing contemplation. 
Raymond describes Catherine’s writing as among “her extraordinary achievements [of] humility’s proof and fruit,” noting the “style, and more importantly … usefulness” of her work that “moved people, provoked compunction, gave instruction” (Astell 41). However, he constructs these accomplishments not as the result of her natural abilities or education, but due to the Holy Spirit working within her (Astell 42). When Raymond discusses the act of reading, he primarily speaks to the present reader engaged with his text. However, according to the anonymously authored Miracoli di Caterina di Iacopo da Siena, Catherine read aloud to her fellow mantellate at supper time, which Tylus notes “situates Catherine in a world of women who, far from spreading snide words about her imagined sanctity, are listening to her read” (127). Meanwhile, Raymond’s own Legenda major, Caffarini’s Leggenda minore and Processo Castellano, Stefano Maconi’s and the Pope’s letters — to name a few — are all indicative of Catherine’s participation not just as a member of a female community but as an active interlocutor of the male religious community as well. Her letters on practical matters (to a prostitute, a Jewish moneylender), political leaders (the Queen of Naples, the Queen of Hungary, the King of France), and concerning the justice system (T273), reveal her participation in wider civic society. Therefore, Catherine of Siena is not a only mystic bound by her interiority and other-worldliness, but rather an active force in this world — her contemporary Italy — and a remarkable human who can operate outside and within societal constructs. 
Catherine wrote a number of texts; the work that seemed to have been the most significant to her was what she referred to as her Libro — the Dialogo della divina provvidenzia. This is a dialogue of 167 chapters between the soul who rises up and God, written a few years before her death during a period of about 13 months, between October 1377 and November 1378. The text generally concerns itself with the spiritual welfare of the reader and features significant thematic overlap with her letters. An important text within the context of publishing and readership, the Dialogo was first printed within the initial few years of the technology having been introduced within Italy, quickly following the printing of Bibles. The first printed edition was done in 1472 by Azzoguidi in Bologna, and it has been printed about 70 times since then; meaning there has been about one edition for every seven to eight years from its first printing through today (Cavallini xiii). Catherine’s prayers make up another set of her texts that were primarily written down by disciples during her ecstatic visions, mostly recorded in Rome, from December 1378 to 1380. Prayer 6, however, is described by Caffarini as to have been written in Catherine’s own hand at Rocca di Tentennano in the Val d’Orcia.[3] The collection of nearly 380 extant letters of Catherine’s reveal how she was a living saint embedded in her community, who developed and fostered a strong network of literary exchange. Her 10-year prolific letter-writing career began in 1370, with letters addressed to men and women, with recipients located throughout Siena, Tuscany, the Italian peninsula, and into Europe.
Catherine as Writer
        In his 1524 text De institutione feminae christianae, Juan Luis Vives explicates his curriculum for teaching the Christian girl — for his purposes, the future female elite of England. He mentions Catherine of Siena as among the virtuous exempla of Christian women in his chapter “On the Instruction of Young Girls.” As this work is dedicated to the English Queen Catherine of Aragon (mother of Queen Mary I), it would certainly have been remiss of him to not include her namesakes, first Catherine of Alexandria, then “The learned virgin of the same name, Catherine of Siena, [who] left fitting monuments of her genius in which the purity of her saintly intellect is resplendent” (IV, 25). The English translator and editor of the modern edition, Charles Fantazzi, issues a footnote here — “Catherine Benincasa … was not a very learned woman, as Vives states. She dictated her writings in the beautiful Tuscan vernacular of Siena” (69). Though Vives may be cultivating the esteem of his patron here, what is interesting is that he is writing prior to Catherine of Siena’s designation as a Church Doctor — a title reserved for those who have contributed to theology or doctrine, and who are regarded as the great teachers of Catholic followers — and Fantazzi glosses the text with some “insight” about Catherine’s lack of learning after she had received this honor. 
Though she lacked a strictly formal education — of the kind that Vives put forth in his instruction manual — Catherine did set out to be educated in general terms, and to learn to read in particular. A friend and fellow mantellata, Alessa de’ Saracini (a woman!) served as her teacher, and Catherine did successfully learn to read the Tuscan vernacular, as well as physically write it in at least an elementary manner (Noffke, Vision Through A Distant Eye 40). As a noblewoman, Alessa was educated at least in the Italian language, and Catherine was wise to enlist the help of a woman from the higher classes to learn to read. Though Catherine is painted as a literate woman to various degrees throughout her biographies and hagiographies, the agency afforded to her literacy differs. Raymond writes, “I must tell you, reader, that this holy virgin knew how to read without being taught by human beings,” and continues to explain that Catherine was unable to learn through the assistance of her friend, but instead learned through divine miraculous intervention (79). While miracles make for a compelling case in efforts toward canonization, and divine teaching may be more appropriate for a holy woman during Catherine’s lifetime to gain respect, it is unlikely that a person putting her mind toward learning to read would be unsuccessful with patient guidance. Catherine’s learning from fellow women situates her inside of a community that is outside of traditional hierarchical modes of elite privilege, and instead contextualizes her as someone who both contributes to and benefits from this Sienese community.
Reading would serve Catherine throughout her life and spiritual devotion. As the text Miracoli di Caterina di Iacopo da Siena notes, she would read about the saints while at the table with her companions, as she would never eat a larger quantity than a nut (“ella legge delle cose de’ Santi, perocché tutte le cose che ella si mette in bocca recando in uno non farebbono quantità quanto una noce” (Valli 9)). Throughout each of her days, she would also be sure to dedicate some time to reading (ibid.):
Tutto l’altro tempo del dì, poich’ è levata la mensa, ispende o in amaestrare genti di seguire la via di Dio, o in contemplare, et di stare rapita come di sopra è detto, o in leggere libri santi; ma il più suo tempo è quello della contemplazione, se ella fosse lasciata, perocché è molto visitata per divozione di genti che la vogliono vedere per pigliare assemplo et dottrina da lei.[4]
Throughout her day, she is in devotion herself, reading, in contemplation, in ecstasy, or with people who come to visit to learn from her —she is very much a part of a literate, teaching and learning community. Probably due to the construction of gender at the time, and following Raymond’s lead, this anonymous writer tries to emphasize Catherine’s commitment to contemplation. In this text, the many visiting people are almost described as a nuisance, but what is significant about their presence is that others are seeking knowledge from her, even if she is not considered learned in an exclusive elite sense of the word.
In addition to being a reader, Catherine seems to have been successful as an auditory learner, attending scholarly preaching and instructional sessions designed for the mantellate. For Catherine, writing and speech are never far apart, as both are methods to spread God’s Word. She had a very retentive memory as evidenced by her summoning of many Biblical passages from the Latin Vulgate Bible in her writing. This sharp memory causes one of her recent biographers and translators, Suzanne Noffke, to question Catherine’s command of Latin, which Raymond stated that she could read and pronounce (though not speak). It seems that Catherine occasionally misquoted scriptures through corruption of her auditory reception of the texts. Still, her intellectual pursuit of Latin reading is evidenced in a letter from Tommaso Caffarini, a follower and biographer, in which he writes, “Mi dimandasti se quello verso del salmo: Domine non est exaltatum cor meum, vuol dire sicut adlattatus sanza el b, o sicut ablattatus col b”[5] (Leggenda minore 1868 253, as quoted in Webb, “Catherine of Siena’s Heart” 803). This indicates an attention to the Latin language as well as a processing of the meaning of Latin words. 
The founder of the Order of Friars Preachers, Dominic de Guzman (1170-1221), believed that preaching was best practiced out of a firm foundation in theology. As part of his commitment to learning, he sent his brothers to be educated in Christian doctrine throughout the universities of Europe, wishing for them to recruit others to also be educated. The famous erudite Dominican friar, Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274), was an influential philosopher, theologian, and jurist in the tradition of scholasticism during his lifetime, and is now honored as a Doctor of the Church, like Catherine. This tradition of learning and education within the Dominican Order manifested itself in Catherine, as she propagated this legacy within her own practice. Her predecessor Thomas Aquinas was also there when she was taught by God to write in her own hand in Letter T272:
Questa lettera, e un’altra ch’io vi mandai, ho scritte di mia mano in su l’isola della Rocca, con molti sospiri e abondanzia di lagrime; in tanto che l’occhio, vedendo, non vedeva; ma piena d’ammirazione ero di me medesima, e della bontà di Dio, considerando la sua misericordia verso le creature che hanno in loro ragione, e la sua Providenzia; la quale abondava verso di me, che per refrigerio, essendo privata della consolazione, la quale per mia ignoranzia io non cognobbi, m’aveva dato, e proveduto con darmi l’attitudine dello scrivere; acciocchè discendendo dall’altezza, avessi un poco con chi sfogare ’l cuore, perchè non scoppiasse. Non volendomi trarre ancora di questa tenebrosa vita; per ammirabile modo me la fermò nella mente mia, siccome fa il maestro al fanciullo, che gli dà lo esempio. Onde, subito che fuste partito da me col glorioso evangelista Joanni e Tommaso di Aquino, così dormendo cominciai ad imparare. Perdonatemi del troppo scrivere, perocchè le mani e la lingua s’accordano col cuore.[6]
For Catherine, God is the ultimate master or teacher, but having both John the Evangelist, writer of a Gospel, and the learned Dominican Thomas Aquinas alongside her while learning the physical act of writing[7] shows her claim of a rich pedigree. However, due to her status as a woman at the bottom of conventional hierarchies, she also insists that she is ignorant, straddling a fine line between education and the lack thereof. Though at the time, actually writing something down was largely considered a technical skill and scribes were often utilized to render thoughts on the page, Catherine sees her ability to write as a comfort and solace. When she is alone and without a scribe upon returning to the earthly realm from the height of divine mystical experience, through the act of writing, Catherine is able to pour out her heart onto the page rather than feel it burst.
        The heart is an important locus for Catherine, a metaphor she uses frequently in her writing, considering it to be a masculine body part that is simultaneously a source of nourishment, while also using the symbol for its religious and Aristotelian implications.[8] What is perhaps most fascinating about her descriptions of the heart is that she orients it accurately,[9] which is information that she would not have been able to glean from contemporary public depictions, according to Heather Webb, who explains that only anatomical descriptions of the heart oriented the organ properly during Catherine’s lifetime (“Catherine of Siena’s Heart” 804). As Catherine explains “how the literal shape of the heart reflects the ideal shape of human affections, with the greater portion directed toward heaven,” Webb argues that it becomes evident that Catherine utilized Dominican encyclopedic sources drawing from Antonio Volpato’s research[10] that often contained depictions of physiology (“Catherine of Siena’s Heart” 805). Catherine is not the only mystic to have been intrigued by science, and biology in particular, as Hildegard of Bingen wrote on scientific and medicinal uses of natural objects in both Physica and Causae et Curae,[11] and Teresa of Ávila punctuates her Libro de la vida with symbols of water, soil, and nature to describe what María M. Carrión refers to as “sustainable devotion” (“Sustainable Devotion. Water, Soil, and Nature in Teresa de Jesús’s Libro de la vida”). While Catherine’s utilization of Dominican encyclopedic sources further confirms her own literacy, it also indicates a general interest in learning that is not limited to reading and writing. Her seeking out of knowledge about the natural world alongside theology points to a commitment to greater understanding and sharing of that knowledge through teaching. As she is able to learn in the traditional sense of listening, reading, and speaking with the educated famiglia that she cultivated around her, but also gleans a special knowledge through mystical experience, she seeks out public speaking and writing to help others gain from what she has learned and what she has taught (and likewise others seek her out). 
Despite her efforts to learn across fields, gaining knowledge through the vernacular and writing using the vernacular was not considered to be true literacy in a Latinate world. Though Catherine was born half a century after Dante had written De vulgari eloquentia, little had changed regarding the status of the Italian and Latin languages, and what participating in those language communities meant. Latin — the language of upper-class men, intellectual humanists, and the church — presented a clear barrier that prevented common people and women in particular from accessing information. Though Catherine was interested in participating in the same language as this separate and self-monitoring exclusive group (as is evident in her efforts to learn Latin), she consciously and emphatically would choose Sienese Italian as her language of writing and speech. As a religious figure doing good work in the world, offering comfort, advice, and care to the prisoners, penitent women, and ill of Siena, how could she choose to communicate in a language they would not be able to understand? Having learned to write through her own community, and being a publicly-engaged woman who addressed her fellow Sienese in speeches in the piazza or through dispatched letters, Catherine was working to include the poor, sick, uneducated and sinful, rather than exclude them. As both a learner and a teacher of God, tasked with delivering messages of the divine to others, the local language of her time was incredibly instrumental to gain followers and communicate. Indeed, her use of language is remarkably similar to Francis of Assisi’s equity-driven approach to spirituality, as he wrote what are considered to be the first Italian language texts in the Umbrian dialect as a means to engage all those in his community who could not understand Latin. His prayer-song “Cantico delle creature” even extols the disenfranchised group of non-human animals, appreciating their dignity in being the creatures of God.[12] Catherine’s use of language is consistent with her spirituality (as well as Christ’s inclusive teachings), which is public, community-based, and poetic while also being meaningful and significant. 
Where Catherine did exclude by language was in letters she wrote in her native Sienese to prominent foreign men and women who likely had little or no grasp of Italian. In response to this, Raymond notably would send an accompanying messenger to Pope Gregory XI in order to interpret, viva voce, Catherine’s words into Latin, thus creating a performative and multivalent text (Tylus 161). Though this may be viewed as an intent to diminish Catherine’s Italian, especially when considering that Raymond also quickly worked to have her Libro translated into Latin, this was actually an effective method for retaining Catherine’s agency and community-focused ideals while also accommodating the Pope. As with all of her language-based choices, Catherine’s use of the vernacular in her letters, especially those addressed to the Pope, serves not only a literary choice, but also a political one: Catherine’s activities were directed towards returning the papal seat from France to Italy (Tylus 162). Similarly, Raymond’s work was invested in Catherine’s canonization, and he was well aware that for a female mystic to access the church hierarchy in this way, she would have to be presented in the language of the elite rather than the language of the people. Translating texts into Latin also ensured the circulation of texts across linguistic boundaries, as they could subsequently be translated into local vernaculars (as with the translation of Catherine’s Libro and Raymond’s Vita into English, discussed below). Italian women religious, like Angela of Foligno and Elena da Udine, did not enjoy the same relatively quick canonization that Catherine did, as most of the texts surrounding their lives were in the vernacular. Angela of Foligno (d. 1309) was not canonized until 2013 by the current Pope Francis, and Elena da Udine (d. 1458), whose notarized vernacular life was written by Simone da Roma, was only beatified after the composition of Giacomo da Udine’s interesting late 15th-century Latin text that focused on her ascent into heaven (Vita Helenae utinensis).[13] 
Although today we may consider authorial dictation to be not quite the same skill as writing, it is worth noting that the great English poet John Milton was blind by the time he wrote Paradise Lost from 1658 to 1664 (with the second edition written in 1674), and “Contemporary accounts relate that Milton, whose eyes finally failed completely in 1651, would dictate to his daughter Deborah, his nephew, or a paid amanuensis every day” (Farmer 19). There are numerous paintings of Milton dictating to his daughters, including the 1826 painting by Eugène Delacroix, suggesting a romanticizing of the oral epic nature of the text, which calls to mind the great works of classical poets like Homer, but also shows an intimate community between writer and scribe. Also, these paintings do not seem to call into question the fact that the one who is manually writing is female, with authorship remaining firmly with the esteemed male poet Milton. However, this charming literary tableau is not afforded to Catherine. As a driving force of her monograph, Reclaiming Catherine of Siena, Jane Tylus problematizes Catherine as a “producer of words,” only trying to claim that she was “certainly a woman intrigued by the technology of writing and interested in exploiting it for a variety of spiritual reasons” (18). Tylus mentions Stephen Botterill as among the dissenters to Catherine as writer. It is worth quoting Botterill’s gloss in the Cambridge History of Italian Literature (considered to be a standard scholarly text) at length (125):
In all these writings Catherine handles the vernacular with subtlety and force, commanding a wide range of tonal registers and using her expressive medium with supple ease and pithy eloquence that make her letters, in particular, one of the monuments of epistolary tradition. But the idea of Catherine as “author” of her own texts bring with it several extra-literary problems that affect interpretation. Born and raised in working-class poverty, and subject, like nearly all women of her century, to virtually complete exclusion from the realm of education and literate culture, she learned to read and write only near the end of her life. Most if not all of her “writings” were thus orally dictated to (male) secretaries, foremost among them the famous friar Raimondo da Capua. It is by no means clear exactly what role these secretaries played in editing, revising or otherwise preparing Catherine’s dictated texts for circulation in manuscript; and any conception of Catherine as a woman writer of the Trecento — a rara avis indeed — needs to be modified by attention to the individual and social realities that govern her work, and which include substantial involvement by men in the preservation of that work in written form.
There are quite a few assumptions made on Botterill’s part here, which stem from a discourse that must modify the woman writing as a “woman writer” rather than a “writer.” Although he will grant that Catherine effectively “handles” language (he does not state that it is her scribes doing this handling), he will not afford her authorship. The neologism “working-class” is anachronistic and unclear — her father was a wool-dyer, a skilled worker and likely providing more than poverty for his family as part of Italy’s growing artisanal class. As is noted in her biographies, Catherine’s family provided her with her own small room within the familial house in which to pray, a luxury not indicative of a poor father. Catherine, a mystic and future saint, chose the life of poverty for herself rather than marry. It is also assumed that education was limited to the realm of a formal education, and that a knowledge of reading and writing could not be attained outside of elite male institutional study. Even the fact that Catherine went to fellow women to attain literacy suggests that a grassroots-style education could be realized by women and the non-elite living in Siena during her time. Reserving the title of “teacher” or “master” for Christ alone, Catherine clearly was not participating in the same kind of educational system that Botterill describes (Noffke 58). The “literate culture” he refers to is likely the Latin literacy discussed above, a literacy that was exclusionary and inequitable. The note of “(male) secretaries” is also inaccurate, as Catherine employed secretaries from both sexes, as is evidenced in many letters that state which women are there with her.[14] Though the men around her worked to promote Catherine’s spirituality and sainthood, there is little to indicate that they would mishandle her texts — they are part of her famiglia and go to her for advice, why should the assumption be that they would change her words when they, part of Latinate culture, do not prevent her from writing in Italian? 
Concluding that Catherine has little or no control of her dictated texts based on little evidence while assuming that men who used scribes had full control is a problematic stance. While we do not have writing extant in her own hand, we also do not have much of the writing in the hand of male writers from her period, either (including Dante and Francis of Assisi). Writing in a communal setting is exactly what we may expect from a figure so embedded in her city and culture, and though in some letters she notes when she writes in her own hand, writing as a solitary and scholarly pursuit alone does not truly capture the full range of the nature of writing. Collaborative writing, as with collaborative visual art, was among the expressions of writing and the arts through the Middle Ages and Renaissance (acknowledging collaborative writing is integral to our understanding of Shakespeare)[15], and to afford some collaborative negotiation as part of Catherine’s writing process is not to diminish her writing and authorship any more than male writers who are also likely not writing entirely alone and never sharing or receiving feedback on their work, which is also likely edited by others. If we are to contextualize Catherine, as Botterill suggests we do, it is to reveal her as a writer of her own time, part of a growing discourse of writing in the developing Italian language, and among the innovators of that language, employing unique and consistent metaphors and imagery while also persuasively enacting diplomacy — indicative of both her poetic prowess and rhetorical style.[16] Writing has always proven to be a site of collaboration and negotiation, and this persists to this day; if we are to problematize Catherine’s authorship, we must also problematize authorship in general, which has a long theoretical history, but is outside of the scope of this present study. For this work, the stance that will be taken is the stance that is afforded to male writers.


        The chapters that follow serve to assert Catherine of Siena’s literary achievements as she worked to innovate the Italian language, interacted with her readership, and was successfully received in other vernacular languages. As a female-bodied mystic who had to carefully negotiate her public and increasingly political status in 14th-century Italy, Catherine used written language to describe her extraordinary relationship with God, discuss spirituality and provide guidance to others, and pragmatically traverse across class and gender lines. The current work utilizes a theoretical framework of gender and queer theory alongside comparative analysis and digital humanities techniques to approach the texts and translations of Catherine in a comprehensive manner that considers their historical context and sheds light on her innovation of, and influence on, medieval and early modern literature.
This work could not have been possible without recent scholarship by Jane Tylus and Suzanne Noffke in particular. Reclaiming Catherine of Siena, the monograph by Tylus, broadly situates Catherine of Siena in a literary discourse, following significant contributions from both historical and religious scholars. In her text, Tylus contends that Catherine is a literary woman, and without this previous work adding legitimacy to Catherine as a writer, the scope of this project would be quite different. Suzanne Noffke, F. Thomas Luongo, Karen Scott, and Heather Webb have each done important work on Catherine of Siena and her writing outside of the field of Literature. Noffke’s English translation of the Letters are the only recent scholarly edition available at the time of writing, and I have followed her dating of the Letters based on her linguistic analysis research throughout the present work. Noffke’s translation of Catherine’s other texts also provide a significant critical contribution, and her monograph Vision through a Distant Eye provides analysis on Catherine’s biography and spirituality in addition to her writing. Luongo, Scott, and Webb have worked with Catherine of Siena’s texts within the field of History, writing several valuable pieces on the subject. Luongo in particular provides meaningful analysis of the letters in relation to Catherine’s political and public involvement, while Scott discusses how Catherine and Raymond received the texts written by Catherine, and Webb writes on the imagery of the heart and of tears in Catherine’s writing. There have additionally been two recent books of essays published on Catherine of Siena: A Companion to Catherine of Siena (2011), edited by Carolyn Muessig, George Ferzoco, and Beverly Kienzle; and Catherine of Siena: The Creation of a Cult (2013), edited by Jeffrey F. Hamburger and Gabriela Signori. These collections take interdisciplinary approaches to Catherine, contributing an important context that includes literary, art historical, historical and religious inquiry. Much of the Italian scholarly tradition to Catherine of Siena has been within the field of Religion, with Giuliana Cavallini’s contributions being the most significant. Cavallini completed critical editions of Catherine’s Dialogo and Orazioni in 1995 and 1978 respectively. Antonio Volpato has done an Italian edition of the letters, though this text is currently without critical notes.
The English tradition of Catherinian studies also benefits from the work of much exciting recent scholarship in the field. Jennifer N. Brown’s recent essays, “From the Charterhouse to the Printing House: Catherine of Siena in Medieval England” (2013) and “The Many Misattributions of Catherine of Siena: Beyond The Orchard In England” (2015), along with her ongoing research on a study of the Harley 2409 manuscript, have provided greater context for Catherine’s English reception and women’s reading practices in late medieval England. A number of essay collections have also proven to be invaluable to my understanding of the English reception of continental texts and English devotional readership. The comparative collection Prophets Abroad (Rosalynn Voaden, ed.) is broad and religious in scope, and deals with the influence of continental religious on British religious. Denise L. Despres’s included essay, “Ecstatic Reading and Missionary Mysticism: The Orcherd of Syon,” provides a departure point for discussing Catherine’s English text as it was received in England. Syon Abbey and its Books (E. A. Jones and Alexandra Walsham) discusses the textual culture of Syon, and the essays by Virgina R. Bainbridge, Vincent Gillespie and C. Annette Grisé are particularly relevant as they address the time period in question for female readership. The series of papers from The Medieval Mystical Tradition, also edited by E. A. Jones, provides additional contributions on English mysticism, including another essay by C. Annette Grisé.
As the present text originated within the field of Comparative Literature, it is theoretically grounded in gender and queer theory, pivoting on works of the feminist canon ranging from Beauvoir and Iragaray to Donna Haraway and Sara Ahmed. There has been much innovative writing about mysticism from both a theoretical and literary perspective of late, including works by Amy M. Hollywood, Barbara Newman, and Anna J. Cruz, all of whose contributions have helped to situate the mystic as a complex and potentially literary figure. Alison Knowles Frazier’s 2005 monograph Possible Lives: Authors and Saints in Renaissance Italy has also provided an important framework in considering the sanctification of Catherine based on her own texts, hagiographies on her life, and the historical context in which this writing was embedded. The digital humanities approach to this research has been influenced by many interactions with practitioners that are not formally cited here, including with Cathy N. Davidson, Patrik Svensson, Katina Rogers, Matthew K. Gold, and others. Formally, I have utilized Franco Moretti’s Distant Reading, which considers looking at a textual corpus as a whole, and balancing that analysis with close humanistic reading, which I have set out to do here. Taking an interdisciplinary perspective, I have also considered statistical modeling from statisticians George E. P. Box and Norman R. Draper, and network analysis from a sociologist’s perspective with Paul D. McLean’s book on networking in Renaissance Florence. 
In the present work, Chapter I, “The Figure of the Mystic” discusses the theoretical groundings that underpin the rest of this work. Situating the mystic as a liminal figure, I argue that the space they inhabit is queer in multiple ways: between male and female, virgin and sexual, human and godlike, earthly and divine. This chapter complicates the history of mystics (both male and female) as brides and soldiers of Christ at once, and notes the fluid gender history of the construction of Christ himself, who is considered to be a nourishing and maternal figure in many ways throughout the Middle Ages and Renaissance periods. Existing in this separate and complicated space, mystical, saintly, religious, and sacred figures like Catherine are able to cross boundaries that others cannot, using their fluid and undefined nature to accomplish their purpose in this world and the next.
Chapter II, “‘O amore ineffabile’: The Poetics of Mysticism,” considers that the exchange that took place between poetic and mystical writing is not merely one-directional. Dante, Petrarch, and Italian poets of the Sicilian, Tuscan, and Dolce Stil Novo schools of poetry would allow erotic language to mingle with spiritual language, and this is likely due to the literary context offered to their work by mysticism. This chapter investigates the subjectivity of the lover as related to the beloved, how the beloved can influence the lover to virtue, and how the earthly or divine court impacts the dynamics of two individuals. By analyzing literature both through a distant and computational manner, as well as through close reading, this chapter posits that both erotic love and spiritual love are ineffable and can intersect, and that both traditional love poets of lyrics and epics and mystical writers from the Beguines through Catherine (at least) are searching for ways to describe the indescribable through similar literary approaches. 
Catherine’s 386 letters are the subject of Chapter III, “The Corpus of Letters and Catherine’s Network,” which discusses their textual state and history, and the contemporary literary network she formed around herself through the transmission of her writing. This chapter considers Catherine’s acts of collaboration and community-building as the means through which she was able to gain spiritual legitimization as well as political power despite her status as a woman and tertiary nun. As a mystical figure moving about in the world, Catherine’s ability to create alliances and a strong network through her innovative use of the emerging vernacular language ensured that she would not be considered a heretic as many other public-facing women were during her lifetime. Additionally, the care that she put into developing strong relationships with religious and intellectual figures established her afterlife through the transmission of her texts over time and place. Leveraging data visualization and network analysis alongside historical and literary inquiry, this chapter constructs Catherine as an individual who is central within a network of many important figures of her time.
Following a distant reading of Catherine’s letters, Chapter IV, “‘Ogni cosa passa:’ How Catherine’s Letters Negotiate This World and The Next” provides a granular approach to the letters, looking specifically at how Catherine modifies her message based on the individuals she is addressing. By looking specifically at her letters that utilize financial language and advice letters that are written to fellow mantellate, this chapter considers how Catherine’s position as a writer and mystic who is concerned with both life on earth and the afterlife in Paradise is able to negotiate that boundary when providing spiritual advice to others. Additionally, Catherine realizes that certain individuals can aid her broader spiritual missions, and in some cases will temper her guidance in order to have continued support from politically strong interlocutors. In particular, this chapter shows Catherine’s pragmatism as she balances her dualistic approach to faith that is both grounded in the economic realities of 14th-century Siena and devoted to everlasting life. 
Finally, the movement of Catherine’s writing into England is treated in Chapter V, “The English Reception of Catherine of Siena’s Texts and Spirituality.” This chapter explores the transposition of the Dialogo, which was written in Italian for an Italian lay audience, translated into Latin for a professional religious audience, then translated into English for a female religious audience. Additionally, the chapter discusses other related books that were brought into the English context that were related to Catherine and engages with the readers’ and book collector’s networks that interacted with this literature. Particular attention is given to the readers at Syon Abbey, as this religious women’s house was the originating site of the English translation of the Dialogo which became known as the Orcherd of Syon. Considering Catherine as a figure who can teach women and as a tempered model of continental devotion, this chapter looks at the translator’s framing of the text, and finally compares Catherine’s mystical writing with that of Julian of Norwich and Margery Kempe to contrast the approaches to spirituality found within England and Italy. 
The intention of the current work is to firmly cast Catherine of Siena as a literary figure through utilizing a gender theory framework and exploring her corpus of writing alongside contemporary poetry, through network analysis, and via the reception of her texts in England. Embedded within Catherine’s authorship are multifaceted literary expressions that present a range of intentionality and demand to be received in different registers. Catherine wrote a variety of texts that had practical, social, political, spiritual and cultural functionalities, offering multivalent readings that situate her writing as that which is imbued with historical and religious interests. She wrote as a mystic and religious figure but also as a literary practitioner of the emerging Italian language, very aware of rhetoric and the art of persuasion. Catherine was a writer who was certainly cognizant of her audience, the afterlife of her writing, and how her texts would be received. She wrote lively and literary prose and prayers that used innovative language and unique imagery, and presented her texts within a context that was consistent with the literature surrounding the topos of love. Catherine’s authorship, embedded within a community-based network and political and public life, presents a truly unique instance of a 14th-century woman who was active in both deed and word, whose literary voice resonated across European vernacular languages and through history. 
________________
[1] “First Order” refers to male religious (monks or friars), the “original” Christian spiritual community. The “Second Order” refers to contemplative nuns who wished to follow in the spirit of the First Order, these communities are cloistered, with nuns living apart from their biological families with other nuns. The “Third Order” or “Secular Order” encompasses both women and men who wished to live in the spirit of the religious community while not drastically changing their current state of life (popular among widows and celibates). The Carmelites, the Franciscans, and the Dominicans all have Third Order followers, and the majority of what we may colloquially refer to as Catholic “nuns” today are actually Third Order “sisters,” as nuns would be in the Second Order.
[2] In a literal sense this is very much the case, as Catherine had a mystical vision of Christ beckoning her from outside the door of her room, which led her to pursue public service.
[3] For a full discussion on this prayer, as well as the critical dissenters, see Noffke’s edition and translation, The Prayers of Catherine of Siena, 2nd edition, 2001, p. 50-55.
[4] “At all other times of the day — from getting up to go to the dining hall — she spends either devoting herself to, or teaching people, to follow God’s way; or in contemplation; and being in ecstasy as I said above; or reading holy books. But she spends the most time in contemplation if she is given leave to, because many people visit her out of devotion and want to see her to take example or teaching from her” (My translation).
[5] “You asked me if that verse of the Psalms: Domine non est exaltatum cor meum, should be sicut adlattatus without the b, or sicut ablattatus with the b” (my translation).
[6] “This letter and another I sent you I’ve written with my own hand on the Isola della Rocca, with so many sighs and tears that I couldn’t see even when I was seeing. But I was filled with wonder at myself and God’s goodness when I thought of his mercy toward me. He provided for my refreshment by giving me the ability to write — a consolation I’ve never known because of my ignorance — so that when I come down from the heights I might have a little something to vent my heart, lest it burst. Because he didn’t want to take me yet from this dark life, he fixed it in my mind in a marvelous manner, the way a teacher does when he gives his pupil a model. Shortly after you left me, I began to learn in my sleep, with the glorious evangelist John and Thomas Aquinas. Forgive me for writing so much, but my hands and my tongue run along with my heart. (Trans. Noffke, Letter T272, vol. II, 505-6). 
[7] See Noffke’s note 51 on page 505 of Volume II of her translation of Catherine’s letters for a discussion on the meaning of this passage. I agree with Noffke’s belief that “there is sufficient anecdotal evidence in the sources to indicate that Catherine did at this time in some fashion (miraculous or otherwise) learn to write in at least an elementary sort of way” (506).
[8] For analysis on Catherine’s heart, see Heather Webb’s article “Catherine of Siena’s Heart” (2005); and her book Medieval Heart (2010), p. 58-61 and p. 135-139 in particular.
[9] “Tu vedi bene che la lampana è larga di sopra, e di sotto stretta; e così è fatto il cuore” / “You see, a lantern is broad on top and narrow at the bottom, and that is the way the heart is shaped” (T23, Trans. Noffke).
[10] Antonio Volpato, “Le conoscenze scientifiche di S. Caterina,” in Con l’occhio e col lume, pp. 191-202.
[11] Hildegard von Bingen, Causae et Curae (Holistic Healing), trans. Manfred Pawlik and Patrick Madigan, ed. by Mary Palmquist and John Kulas (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, Inc., 1994); Hildegard von Bingen, Physica, trans. Priscilla Throop (Rochester, Vermont: Healing Arts Press, 1998).
[12] Today, Francis’s eating habits would be considered raw-food vegan, though this was probably more of an expression of abstention and bodily denial than an interest in non-human animal welfare. 
[13] For more on this text, see Alison Knowles Frazier’s Possible Lives. 
[14] See also Tylus p. 83. Among her primary scribes were the Dominican sisters Alessa de’ Saracini, Francesca Gori and Giovanna Pazza, and young laymen Neri di Landoccio, Stefano Maconi and Barduccio Canigiani.
[15] See, for example: Egan’s “Intention in the Editing of Shakespeare,” the chapter “Shakespeare and Lord Strange’s Men” in Manley and MacLean’s Lord Strange's Men and Their Plays, Vickers’s Shakespeare, Co-Author: A Historical Study of Five Collaborative Plays.
[16] Brunetto Latini, Dante’s famous damned teacher, argues that Cicero’s teachings on speeches also apply to letters, suggesting to me that the oral production of writing is rhetorically sound. Latini’s French Tresor reinforces his notion that speaking is equivalent to letters:” Or dit li mastres que la escience de retorique est en .ii. mainieres, une qui est en dissant de boche & une autre que l’en mande par letres; mais li ensegnement sont comun, car il ne puet chaloir que l’en die ou en conte ou que l’en mande par letres…” (296). For a full discussion of the Ars dictaminis and Brunetto Latini, see Witt’s Brunetto Latini and the Italian Tradition of Ars Dictaminis.