Acknowledgements


One of the things I do, when I step up on a stage … I bring everyone who has ever been kind to me with me — ... I say come with me, I’m going on the stage, come with me, I need you now … so I don’t ever feel I have no help. I’ve had rainbows in my clouds. — Maya Angelou


        Writing is a collaborative enterprise. This text could not be possible without the many people who have helped me along the way, and who I “bring” with me whenever I face an arduous task. I have been fortunate to have made lifelong friendships with professors from my undergraduate and master’s degrees — Jack Salzman, Clara Mucci, and Carrol Coates have guided me through my early academic years and continue to mentor me now. At the Graduate Center, Cathy Davidson has inspired me through her tireless work to drive equity in higher education, and encouraged me to include a digital component as part of the present dissertation. My committee members Monica Calabritto and Steven Kruger have offered me engaging conversations, sharp eyes, and gentle corrections. Most of all, my advisor Clare Carroll has been the best guide I could have asked for on this journey, giving me so much of her time, intellect, and care throughout this process. 
        Working alongside peers has been a great gift, and I would like to acknowledge the discussion, support, collaboration, and friendship I have shared with Yulia Greyman, Danica Savonick, Kalle Westerling, Javiela Evangelista, Becca Howard, and the Folger Library’s “Researching the Archive” 2015-2016 seminar cohort. The Futures Initiative and HASTAC have provided a second home for me in my last few years of graduate school, and I would like to thank Katina Rogers, Lauren Melendez, and Kaysi Holman for being great colleagues who continue to do such important and meaningful work. Additionally, my students have in many ways taught me the most; I am so appreciative of the time I have spent in the classroom building knowledge together.
        Finally, my family has provided me with such a strong foundation and so much unwavering support that I could not have done this without them. My siblings, Teresa and Anthony, have served as ad hoc editors and presentation audiences, and continue to amaze me as they grow. My grandmother, Marie, perpetually extends kindness, generosity, and tea. My parents, Maryann and George, have always believed in me even when I did not believe in myself, and I cannot thank them enough.